effort was to be avoided by every means.

HOCKEY informed the Workshop about one major current activity of CETH,
namely a catalogue of machine-readable texts in the humanities.  Held on
RLIN at present, the catalogue has been concentrated on ASCII as opposed
to digitized images of text.  She is exploring ways to improve the
catalogue and make it more widely available, and welcomed suggestions
about these concerns.  CETH owns the records, which are not just
restricted to RLIN, and can distribute them however it wishes.

Taking up LESK's earlier question, BATTIN inquired whether LC, since it
is accepting electronic files and designing a mechanism for dealing with
that rather than putting books on shelves, would become responsible for
the National Copyright Depository of Electronic Materials.  Of course
that could not be accomplished overnight, but it would be something LC
could plan for.  GIFFORD acknowledged that much thought was being devoted
to that set of problems and returned the discussion to the issue raised
by LYNCH--whether or not putting the kind of records that both BATTIN and
HOCKEY have been talking about in RLIN is not a satisfactory solution. 
It seemed to him that RLIN answered LYNCH's original point concerning
some kind of directory for these kinds of materials.  In a situation
where somebody is attempting to decide whether or not to scan this or
film that or to learn whether or not someone has already done so, LYNCH
suggested, RLIN is helpful, but it is not helpful in the case of a local,
on-line catalogue.  Further, one would like to have her or his system be
aware that that exists in digital form, so that one can present it to a
patron, even though one did not digitize it, if it is out of copyright. 
The only way to make those linkages would be to perform a tremendous
amount of real-time look-up, which would be awkward at best, or
periodically to yank the whole file from RLIN and match it against one's
own stuff, which is a nuisance.

But where, ERWAY inquired, does one stop including things that are
available with Internet, for instance, in one's local catalogue?
It almost seems that that is LC's means to acquire access to them.
That represents LC's new form of library loan.  Perhaps LC's new on-line
catalogue is an amalgamation of all these catalogues on line.  LYNCH
conceded that perhaps that was true in the very long term, but was not
applicable to scanning in the short term.  In his view, the totals cited
by Yale, 10,000 books over perhaps a four-year period, and 1,000-1,500
books from Cornell, were not big numbers, while searching all over
creation for relatively rare occurrences will prove to be less efficient. 
As GIFFORD wondered if this would not be a separable file on RLIN and
could be requested from them, BATTIN interjected that it was easily
accessible to an institution.  SEVERTSON pointed out that that file, cum
enhancements, was available with reference information on CD-ROM, which
makes it a little more available.

In HOCKEY's view, the real question facing the Workshop is what to put in
this catalogue, because that raises the question of what constitutes a
publication in the electronic world.  (WEIBEL interjected that Eric Joule
in OCLC's Office of Research is also wrestling with this particular
problem, while GIFFORD thought it sounded fairly generic.)  HOCKEY
contended that a majority of texts in the humanities are in the hands
of either a small number of large research institutions or individuals
and are not generally available for anyone else to access at all.
She wondered if these texts ought to be catalogued.

After argument proceeded back and forth for several minutes over why
cataloguing might be a necessary service, LEBRON suggested that this
issue involved the responsibility of a publisher.  The fact that someone
has created something electronically and keeps it under his or her
control does not constitute publication.  Publication implies
dissemination.  While it would be important for a scholar to let other
people know that this creation exists, in many respects this is no
different from an unpublished manuscript.  That is what is being accessed
in there, except that now one is not looking at it in the hard-copy but
in the electronic environment.

LEBRON expressed puzzlement at the variety of ways electronic publishing
has been viewed.  Much of what has been discussed throughout these two
days has concerned CD-ROM publishing, whereas in the on-line environment
that she confronts, the constraints and challenges are very different. 
Sooner or later LC will have to deal with the concept of on-line
publishing.  Taking up the comment ERWAY made earlier about storing
copies, LEBRON gave her own journal as an example.  How would she deposit
OJCCT for copyright?, she asked, because the journal will exist in the
mainframe at OCLC and people will be able to access it.  Here the
situation is different, ownership versus access, and is something that
arises with publication in the on-line environment, faster than is
sometimes realized.  Lacking clear answers to all of these questions
herself, LEBRON did not anticipate that LC would be able to take a role
in helping to define some of them for quite a while.

GREENFIELD observed that LC's Network Development Office is attempting,
among other things, to explore the limits of MARC as a standard in terms
of handling electronic information.  GREENFIELD also noted that Rebecca
GUENTHER from that office gave a paper to the American Society for
Information Science (ASIS) summarizing several of the discussion papers
that were coming out of the Network Development Office.  GREENFIELD said
he understood that that office had a list-server soliciting just the kind
of feedback received today concerning the difficulties of identifying and
cataloguing electronic information.  GREENFIELD hoped that everybody
would be aware of that and somehow contribute to that conversation.

Noting two of LC's roles, first, to act as a repository of record for
material that is copyrighted in this country, and second, to make
materials it holds available in some limited form to a clientele that
goes beyond Congress, BESSER suggested that it was incumbent on LC to
extend those responsibilities to all the things being published in
electronic form.  This would mean eventually accepting electronic
formats.  LC could require that at some point they be in a certain
limited set of formats, and then develop mechanisms for allowing people
to access those in the same way that other things are accessed.  This
does not imply that they are on the network and available to everyone. 
LC does that with most of its bibliographic records, BESSER said, which
end up migrating to the utility (e.g., OCLC) or somewhere else.  But just
as most of LC's books are available in some form through interlibrary
loan or some other mechanism, so in the same way electronic formats ought
to be available to others in some format, though with some copyright
considerations.  BESSER was not suggesting that these mechanisms be
established tomorrow, only that they seemed to fall within LC's purview,
and that there should be long-range plans to establish them.

Acknowledging that those from LC in the room agreed with BESSER
concerning the need to confront difficult questions, GIFFORD underscored
the magnitude of the problem of what to keep and what to select.  GIFFORD
noted that LC currently receives some 31,000 items per day, not counting
electronic materials, and argued for much more distributed responsibility
in order to maintain and store electronic information.

BESSER responded that the assembled group could be viewed as a starting
point, whose initial operating premise could be helping to move in this
direction and defining how LC could do so, for example, in areas of
standardization or distribution of responsibility.

FLEISCHHAUER added that AM was fully engaged, wrestling with some of the
questions that pertain to the conversion of older historical materials,
which would be one thing that the Library of Congress might do.  Several
points mentioned by BESSER and several others on this question have a
much greater impact on those who are concerned with cataloguing and the
networking of bibliographic information, as well as preservation itself.

Speaking directly to AM, which he considered was a largely uncopyrighted
database, LYNCH urged development of a network version of AM, or
consideration of making the data in it available to people interested in
doing network multimedia.  On account of the current great shortage of
digital data that is both appealing and unencumbered by complex rights
problems, this course of action could have a significant effect on making
network multimedia a reality.

In this connection, FLEISCHHAUER reported on a fragmentary prototype in
LC's Office of Information Technology Services that attempts to associate
digital images of photographs with cataloguing information in ways that
work within a local area network--a step, so to say, toward AM's
construction of some sort of apparatus for access.  Further, AM has
attempted to use standard data forms in order to help make that
distinction between the access tools and the underlying data, and thus
believes that the database is networkable.

A delicate and agonizing policy question for LC, however, which comes
back to resources and unfortunately has an impact on this, is to find
some appropriate, honorable, and legal cost-recovery possibilities.  A
certain skittishness concerning cost-recovery has made people unsure
exactly what to do.  AM would be highly receptive to discussing further
LYNCH's offer to test or demonstrate its database in a network
environment, FLEISCHHAUER said.

Returning the discussion to what she viewed as the vital issue of
electronic deposit, BATTIN recommended that LC initiate a catalytic
process in terms of distributed responsibility, that is, bring together
the distributed organizations and set up a study group to look at all
these issues and see where we as a nation should move.  The broader
issues of how we deal with the management of electronic information will
not disappear, but only grow worse.

LESK took up this theme and suggested that LC attempt to persuade one
major library in each state to deal with its state equivalent publisher,
which might produce a cooperative project that would be equitably
distributed around the country, and one in which LC would be dealing with
a minimal number of publishers and minimal copyright problems.

GRABER remarked the recent development in the scientific community of a
willingness to use SGML and either deposit or interchange on a fairly
standardized format.  He wondered if a similar movement was taking place
in the humanities.  Although the National Library of Medicine found only
a few publishers to cooperate in a like venture two or three years ago, a
new effort might generate a much larger number willing to cooperate.

KIMBALL recounted his unit's (Machine-Readable Collections Reading Room)
troubles with the commercial publishers of electronic media in acquiring
materials for LC's collections, in particular the publishers' fear that
they would not be able to cover their costs and would lose control of
their products, that LC would give them away or sell them and make
profits from them.  He doubted that the publishing industry was prepared
to move into this area at the moment, given its resistance to allowing LC
to use its machine-readable materials as the Library would like.

The copyright law now addresses compact disk as a medium, and LC can
request one copy of that, or two copies if it is the only version, and
can request copies of software, but that fails to address magazines or
books or anything like that which is in machine-readable form.

GIFFORD acknowledged the thorny nature of this issue, which he illustrated
with the example of the cumbersome process involved in putting a copy of a
scientific database on a LAN in LC's science reading room.  He also
acknowledged that LC needs help and could enlist the energies and talents
of Workshop participants in thinking through a number of these problems.

GIFFORD returned the discussion to getting the image and text people to
think through together where they want to go in the long term.  MYLONAS
conceded that her experience at the Pierce Symposium the previous week at
Georgetown University and this week at LC had forced her to reevaluate
her perspective on the usefulness of text as images.  MYLONAS framed the
issues in a series of questions:  How do we acquire machine-readable
text?  Do we take pictures of it and perform OCR on it later?  Is it
important to obtain very high-quality images and text, etc.? 
FLEISCHHAUER agreed with MYLONAS's framing of strategic questions, adding
that a large institution such as LC probably has to do all of those
things at different times.  Thus, the trick is to exercise judgment.  The
Workshop had added to his and AM's considerations in making those
judgments.  Concerning future meetings or discussions, MYLONAS suggested
that screening priorities would be helpful.

WEIBEL opined that the diversity reflected in this group was a sign both
of the health and of the immaturity of the field, and more time would
have to pass before we convince one another concerning standards.

An exchange between MYLONAS and BATTIN clarified the point that the
driving force behind both the Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects was
the preservation of knowledge for the future, not simply for particular
research use.  In the case of Perseus, MYLONAS said, the assumption was
that the texts would not be entered again into electronically readable
form.  SPERBERG-McQUEEN added that a scanned image would not serve as an
archival copy for purposes of preservation in the case of, say, the Bill
of Rights, in the sense that the scanned images are effectively the
archival copies for the Cornell mathematics books.


               ***   ***   ***   ******   ***   ***   ***


                          Appendix I:  PROGRAM



                                WORKSHOP
                                   ON
                               ELECTRONIC
                                  TEXTS



                             9-10 June 1992

                           Library of Congress
                            Washington, D.C.



    Supported by a Grant from the David and Lucile Packard Foundation


Tuesday, 9 June 1992

NATIONAL DEMONSTRATION LAB, ATRIUM, LIBRARY MADISON

8:30 AM   Coffee and Danish, registration

9:00 AM   Welcome

          Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs, and Carl
             Fleischhauer, Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress

9:l5 AM   Session I.  Content in a New Form:  Who Will Use It and What
          Will They Do?

          Broad description of the range of electronic information. 
          Characterization of who uses it and how it is or may be used. 
          In addition to a look at scholarly uses, this session will
          include a presentation on use by students (K-12 and college)
          and the general public.

          Moderator:  James Daly
          Avra Michelson, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff,
             National Archives and Records Administration (Overview)
          Susan H. Veccia, Team Leader, American Memory, User Evaluation,
             and
          Joanne Freeman, Associate Coordinator, American Memory, Library
             of Congress (Beyond the scholar)

10:30-
11:00 AM  Break

11:00 AM  Session II.  Show and Tell.

          Each presentation to consist of a fifteen-minute
          statement/show; group discussion will follow lunch.

          Moderator:  Jacqueline Hess, Director, National Demonstration
             Lab

            1.  A classics project, stressing texts and text retrieval
                more than multimedia:  Perseus Project, Harvard
                University
                Elli Mylonas, Managing Editor

            2.  Other humanities projects employing the emerging norms of
                the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI):  Chadwyck-Healey's
                The English Poetry Full Text Database and/or Patrologia
                Latina Database
                Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, Chadwyck-Healey, Inc.

            3.  American Memory
                Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator, and
                Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator, Library of Congress

            4.  Founding Fathers example from Packard Humanities
                Institute:  The Papers of George Washington, University
                of Virginia
                Dorothy Twohig, Managing Editor, and/or
                David Woodley Packard

            5.  An electronic medical journal offering graphics and
                full-text searchability:  The Online Journal of Current
                Clinical Trials, American Association for the Advancement
                of Science
                Maria L. Lebron, Managing Editor

            6.  A project that offers facsimile images of pages but omits
                searchable text:  Cornell math books
                Lynne K. Personius, Assistant Director, Cornell
                   Information Technologies for Scholarly Information
                   Sources, Cornell University

12:30 PM  Lunch  (Dining Room A, Library Madison 620.  Exhibits
          available.)

1:30 PM   Session II.  Show and Tell (Cont'd.).

3:00-
3:30 PM   Break

3:30-
5:30 PM   Session III.  Distribution, Networks, and Networking:  Options
          for Dissemination.

          Published disks:  University presses and public-sector
             publishers, private-sector publishers
          Computer networks

          Moderator:  Robert G. Zich, Special Assistant to the Associate
             Librarian for Special Projects, Library of Congress
          Clifford A. Lynch, Director, Library Automation, University of
             California
          Howard Besser, School of Library and Information Science,
             University of Pittsburgh
          Ronald L. Larsen, Associate Director of Libraries for
             Information Technology, University of Maryland at College
             Park
          Edwin B. Brownrigg, Executive Director, Memex Research
             Institute

6:30 PM   Reception  (Montpelier Room, Library Madison 619.)

                                 ******

Wednesday, 10 June 1992

DINING ROOM A, LIBRARY MADISON 620

8:30 AM   Coffee and Danish

9:00 AM   Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
          Image Storage Formats.

          Moderator:  William L. Hooton, Vice President of Operations,
             I-NET

          A) Principal Methods for Image Capture of Text:
             Direct scanning
             Use of microform

          Anne R. Kenney, Assistant Director, Department of Preservation
             and Conservation, Cornell University
          Pamela Q.J. Andre, Associate Director, Automation, and
          Judith A. Zidar, Coordinator, National Agricultural Text
             Digitizing Program (NATDP), National Agricultural Library
             (NAL)
          Donald J. Waters, Head, Systems Office, Yale University Library

          B) Special Problems:
             Bound volumes
             Conservation
             Reproducing printed halftones

          Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress
          George Thoma, Chief, Communications Engineering Branch,
             National Library of Medicine (NLM)

10:30-
11:00 AM  Break

11:00 AM  Session IV.  Image Capture, Text Capture, Overview of Text and
          Image Storage Formats (Cont'd.).

          C) Image Standards and Implications for Preservation

          Jean Baronas, Senior Manager, Department of Standards and
             Technology, Association for Information and Image Management
             (AIIM)
          Patricia Battin, President, The Commission on Preservation and
             Access (CPA)

          D) Text Conversion:
             OCR vs. rekeying
             Standards of accuracy and use of imperfect texts
             Service bureaus

          Stuart Weibel, Senior Research Specialist, Online Computer
             Library Center, Inc. (OCLC)
          Michael Lesk, Executive Director, Computer Science Research,
             Bellcore
          Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator, American Memory, Library of
             Congress
          Pamela Q.J. Andre, Associate Director, Automation, and
          Judith A. Zidar, Coordinator, National Agricultural Text
             Digitizing Program (NATDP), National Agricultural Library
             (NAL)

12:30-
1:30 PM   Lunch

1:30 PM   Session V.  Approaches to Preparing Electronic Texts.

          Discussion of approaches to structuring text for the computer;
          pros and cons of text coding, description of methods in
          practice, and comparison of text-coding methods.

          Moderator:  Susan Hockey, Director, Center for Electronic Texts
             in the Humanities (CETH), Rutgers and Princeton Universities
          David Woodley Packard
          C.M. Sperberg-McQueen, Editor, Text Encoding Initiative (TEI),
             University of Illinois-Chicago
          Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President, Chadwyck-Healey, Inc.

3:30-
4:00 PM   Break

4:00 PM   Session VI.  Copyright Issues.

          Marybeth Peters, Policy Planning Adviser to the Register of
             Copyrights, Library of Congress

5:00 PM   Session VII. Conclusion.

          General discussion.
          What topics were omitted or given short shrift that anyone
             would like to talk about now?
          Is there a "group" here?  What should the group do next, if
             anything?  What should the Library of Congress do next, if
             anything?
          Moderator:  Prosser Gifford, Director for Scholarly Programs,
             Library of Congress

6:00 PM   Adjourn


               ***   ***   ***   ******   ***   ***   ***


                         Appendix II:  ABSTRACTS


SESSION I

Avra MICHELSON           Forecasting the Use of Electronic Texts by
                         Social Sciences and Humanities Scholars

This presentation explores the ways in which electronic texts are likely
to be used by the non-scientific scholarly community.  Many of the
remarks are drawn from a report the speaker coauthored with Jeff
Rothenberg, a computer scientist at The RAND Corporation.

The speaker assesses 1) current scholarly use of information technology
and 2) the key trends in information technology most relevant to the
research process, in order to predict how social sciences and humanities
scholars are apt to use electronic texts.  In introducing the topic,
current use of electronic texts is explored broadly within the context of
scholarly communication.  From the perspective of scholarly
communication, the work of humanities and social sciences scholars
involves five processes:  1) identification of sources, 2) communication
with colleagues, 3) interpretation and analysis of data, 4) dissemination
of research findings, and 5) curriculum development and instruction.  The
extent to which computation currently permeates aspects of scholarly
communication represents a viable indicator of the prospects for
electronic texts.

The discussion of current practice is balanced by an analysis of key
trends in the scholarly use of information technology.  These include the
trends toward end-user computing and connectivity, which provide a
framework for forecasting the use of electronic texts through this
millennium.  The presentation concludes with a summary of the ways in
which the nonscientific scholarly community can be expected to use
electronic texts, and the implications of that use for information
providers.

Susan VECCIA and Joanne FREEMAN    Electronic Archives for the Public: 
                                   Use of American Memory in Public and
                                   School Libraries

This joint discussion focuses on nonscholarly applications of electronic
library materials, specifically addressing use of the Library of Congress
American Memory (AM) program in a small number of public and school
libraries throughout the United States.  AM consists of selected Library
of Congress primary archival materials, stored on optical media
(CD-ROM/videodisc), and presented with little or no editing.  Many
collections are accompanied by electronic introductions and user's guides
offering background information and historical context.  Collections
represent a variety of formats including photographs, graphic arts,
motion pictures, recorded sound, music, broadsides and manuscripts,
books, and pamphlets.

In 1991, the Library of Congress began a nationwide evaluation of AM in
different types of institutions.  Test sites include public libraries,
elementary and secondary school libraries, college and university
libraries, state libraries, and special libraries.  Susan VECCIA and
Joanne FREEMAN will discuss their observations on the use of AM by the
nonscholarly community, using evidence gleaned from this ongoing
evaluation effort.

VECCIA will comment on the overall goals of the evaluation project, and
the types of public and school libraries included in this study.  Her
comments on nonscholarly use of AM will focus on the public library as a
cultural and community institution, often bridging the gap between formal
and informal education.  FREEMAN will discuss the use of AM in school
libraries.  Use by students and teachers has revealed some broad
questions about the use of electronic resources, as well as definite
benefits gained by the "nonscholar."  Topics will include the problem of
grasping content and context in an electronic environment, the stumbling
blocks created by "new" technologies, and the unique skills and interests
awakened through use of electronic resources.

SESSION II

Elli MYLONAS             The Perseus Project:  Interactive Sources and
                         Studies in Classical Greece

The Perseus Project (5) has just released Perseus 1.0, the first publicly
available version of its hypertextual database of multimedia materials on
classical Greece.  Perseus is designed to be used by a wide audience,
comprised of readers at the student and scholar levels.  As such, it must
be able to locate information using different strategies, and it must
contain enough detail to serve the different needs of its users.  In
addition, it must be delivered so that it is affordable to its target
audience.  [These problems and the solutions we chose are described in
Mylonas, "An Interface to Classical Greek Civilization," JASIS 43:2,
March 1992.]

In order to achieve its objective, the project staff decided to make a
conscious separation between selecting and converting textual, database,
and image data on the one hand, and putting it into a delivery system on
the other.  That way, it is possible to create the electronic data
without thinking about the restrictions of the delivery system.  We have
made a great effort to choose system-independent formats for our data,
and to put as much thought and work as possible into structuring it so
that the translation from paper to electronic form will enhance the value
of the data. [A discussion of these solutions as of two years ago is in
Elli Mylonas, Gregory Crane, Kenneth Morrell, and D. Neel Smith, "The
Perseus Project:  Data in the Electronic Age," in Accessing Antiquity: 
The Computerization of Classical Databases, J. Solomon and T. Worthen
(eds.),  University of Arizona Press, in press.]

Much of the work on Perseus is focused on collecting and converting the
data on which the project is based.  At the same time, it is necessary to
provide means of access to the information, in order to make it usable,
and them to investigate how it is used.  As we learn more about what
students and scholars from different backgrounds do with Perseus, we can
adjust our data collection, and also modify the system to accommodate
them.  In creating a delivery system for general use, we have tried to
avoid favoring any one type of use by allowing multiple forms of access
to and navigation through the system.

The way text is handled exemplifies some of these principles.  All text
in Perseus is tagged using SGML, following the guidelines of the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI).  This markup is used to index the text, and
process it so that it can be imported into HyperCard.  No SGML markup
remains in the text that reaches the user, because currently it would be
too expensive to create a system that acts on SGML in real time. 
However, the regularity provided by SGML is essential for verifying the
content of the texts, and greatly speeds all the processing performed on
them.  The fact that the texts exist in SGML ensures that they will be
relatively easy to port to different hardware and software, and so will
outlast the current delivery platform.  Finally, the SGML markup
incorporates existing canonical reference systems (chapter, verse, line,
etc.); indexing and navigation are based on these features.  This ensures
that the same canonical reference will always resolve to the same point
within a text, and that all versions of our texts, regardless of delivery
platform (even paper printouts) will function the same way.

In order to provide tools for users, the text is processed by a
morphological analyzer, and the results are stored in a database. 
Together with the index, the Greek-English Lexicon, and the index of all
the English words in the definitions of the lexicon, the morphological
analyses comprise a set of linguistic tools that allow users of all
levels to work with the textual information, and to accomplish different
tasks.  For example, students who read no Greek may explore a concept as
it appears in Greek texts by using the English-Greek index, and then
looking up works in the texts and translations, or scholars may do
detailed morphological studies of word use by using the morphological
analyses of the texts.  Because these tools were not designed for any one
use, the same tools and the same data can be used by both students and
scholars.

NOTES:
     (5)  Perseus is based at Harvard University, with collaborators at
     several other universities.  The project has been funded primarily
     by the Annenberg/CPB Project, as well as by Harvard University,
     Apple Computer, and others.  It is published by Yale University
     Press.  Perseus runs on Macintosh computers, under the HyperCard
     program.

Eric CALALUCA

Chadwyck-Healey embarked last year on two distinct yet related full-text
humanities database projects.

The English Poetry Full-Text Database and the Patrologia Latina Database
represent new approaches to linguistic research resources.  The size and
complexity of the projects present problems for electronic publishers,
but surmountable ones if they remain abreast of the latest possibilities
in data capture and retrieval software techniques.

The issues which required address prior to the commencement of the
projects were legion:

     1.   Editorial selection (or exclusion) of materials in each
          database

     2.   Deciding whether or not to incorporate a normative encoding
          structure into the databases?
               A.  If one is selected, should it be SGML?
               B.  If SGML, then the TEI?
     
     3.   Deliver as CD-ROM, magnetic tape, or both?

     4.   Can one produce retrieval software advanced enough for the
          postdoctoral linguist, yet accessible enough for unattended
          general use?  Should one try?

     5.   Re fair and liberal networking policies, what are the risks to
          an electronic publisher?

     6.   How does the emergence of national and international education
          networks affect the use and viability of research projects
          requiring high investment?  Do the new European Community
          directives concerning database protection necessitate two
          distinct publishing projects, one for North America and one for
          overseas?

From new notions of "scholarly fair use" to the future of optical media,
virtually every issue related to electronic publishing was aired.  The
result is two projects which have been constructed to provide the quality
research resources with the fewest encumbrances to use by teachers and
private scholars.

Dorothy TWOHIG

In spring 1988 the editors of the papers of George Washington, John
Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Benjamin Franklin were
approached by classics scholar David Packard on behalf of the Packard
Humanities Foundation with a proposal to produce a CD-ROM edition of the
complete papers of each of the Founding Fathers.  This electronic edition
will supplement the published volumes, making the documents widely
available to students and researchers at reasonable cost.  We estimate
that our CD-ROM edition of Washington's Papers will be substantially
completed within the next two years and ready for publication.  Within
the next ten years or so, similar CD-ROM editions of the Franklin, Adams,
Jefferson, and Madison papers also will be available.  At the Library of
Congress's session on technology, I would like to discuss not only the
experience of the Washington Papers in producing the CD-ROM edition, but
the impact technology has had on these major editorial projects. 
Already, we are editing our volumes with an eye to the material that will
be readily available in the CD-ROM edition.  The completed electronic
edition will provide immense possibilities for the searching of documents
for information in a way never possible before.  The kind of technical
innovations that are currently available and on the drawing board will
soon revolutionize historical research and the production of historical
documents.  Unfortunately, much of this new technology is not being used
in the planning stages of historical projects, simply because many
historians are aware only in the vaguest way of its existence.  At least
two major new historical editing projects are considering microfilm
editions, simply because they are not aware of the possibilities of
electronic alternatives and the advantages of the new technology in terms
of flexibility and research potential compared to microfilm.  In fact,
too many of us in history and literature are still at the stage of
struggling with our PCs.  There are many historical editorial projects in
progress presently, and an equal number of literary projects.  While the
two fields have somewhat different approaches to textual editing, there
are ways in which electronic technology can be of service to both.

Since few of the editors involved in the Founding Fathers CD-ROM editions
are technical experts in any sense, I hope to point out in my discussion
of our experience how many of these electronic innovations can be used
successfully by scholars who are novices in the world of new technology. 
One of the major concerns of the sponsors of the multitude of new
scholarly editions is the limited audience reached by the published
volumes.  Most of these editions are being published in small quantities
and the publishers' price for them puts them out of the reach not only of
individual scholars but of most public libraries and all but the largest
educational institutions.  However, little attention is being given to
ways in which technology can bypass conventional publication to make
historical and literary documents more widely available.

What attracted us most to the CD-ROM edition of The Papers of George
Washington was the fact that David Packard's aim was to make a complete
edition of all of the 135,000 documents we have collected available in an
inexpensive format that would be placed in public libraries, small
colleges, and even high schools.  This would provide an audience far
beyond our present 1,000-copy, $45 published edition.  Since the CD-ROM
edition will carry none of the explanatory annotation that appears in the
published volumes, we also feel that the use of the CD-ROM will lead many
researchers to seek out the published volumes.

In addition to ignorance of new technical advances, I have found that too
many editors--and historians and literary scholars--are resistant and
even hostile to suggestions that electronic technology may enhance their
work.  I intend to discuss some of the arguments traditionalists are
advancing to resist technology, ranging from distrust of the speed with
which it changes (we are already wondering what is out there that is
better than CD-ROM) to suspicion of the technical language used to
describe electronic developments.

Maria LEBRON

The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials, a joint venture of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the Online
Computer Library Center, Inc. (OCLC), is the first peer-reviewed journal
to provide full text, tabular material, and line illustrations on line. 
This presentation will discuss the genesis and start-up period of the
journal.  Topics of discussion will include historical overview,
day-to-day management of the editorial peer review, and manuscript
tagging and publication.  A demonstration of the journal and its features
will accompany the presentation.

Lynne PERSONIUS

Cornell University Library, Cornell Information Technologies, and Xerox
Corporation, with the support of the Commission on Preservation and
Access, and Sun Microsystems, Inc., have been collaborating in a project
to test a prototype system for recording brittle books as digital images
and producing, on demand, high-quality archival paper replacements.  The
project goes beyond that, however, to investigate some of the issues
surrounding scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to
digital images in a network environment.

The Joint Study in Digital Preservation began in January 1990.  Xerox
provided the College Library Access and Storage System (CLASS) software,
a prototype 600-dots-per-inch (dpi) scanner, and the hardware necessary
to support network printing on the DocuTech printer housed in Cornell's
Computing and Communications Center (CCC).

The Cornell staff using the hardware and software became an integral part
of the development and testing process for enhancements to the CLASS
software system.  The collaborative nature of this relationship is
resulting in a system that is specifically tailored to the preservation
application.

A digital library of 1,000 volumes (or approximately 300,000 images) has
been created and is stored on an optical jukebox that resides in CCC. 
The library includes a collection of select mathematics monographs that
provides mathematics faculty with an opportunity to use the electronic
library.  The remaining volumes were chosen for the library to test the
various capabilities of the scanning system.

One project objective is to provide users of the Cornell library and the
library staff with the ability to request facsimiles of digitized images
or to retrieve the actual electronic image for browsing.  A prototype
viewing workstation has been created by Xerox, with input into the design
by a committee of Cornell librarians and computer professionals.  This
will allow us to experiment with patron access to the images that make up
the digital library.  The viewing station provides search, retrieval, and
(ultimately) printing functions with enhancements to facilitate
navigation through multiple documents.

Cornell currently is working to extend access to the digital library to
readers using workstations from their offices.  This year is devoted to
the development of a network resident image conversion and delivery
server, and client software that will support readers who use Apple
Macintosh computers, IBM windows platforms, and Sun workstations. 
Equipment for this development was provided by Sun Microsystems with
support from the Commission on Preservation and Access.

During the show-and-tell session of the Workshop on Electronic Texts, a
prototype view station will be demonstrated.  In addition, a display of
original library books that have been digitized will be available for
review with associated printed copies for comparison.  The fifteen-minute
overview of the project will include a slide presentation that
constitutes a "tour" of the preservation digitizing process.

The final network-connected version of the viewing station will provide
library users with another mechanism for accessing the digital library,
and will also provide the capability of viewing images directly.  This
will not require special software, although a powerful computer with good
graphics will be needed.

The Joint Study in Digital Preservation has generated a great deal of
interest in the library community.  Unfortunately, or perhaps
fortunately, this project serves to raise a vast number of other issues
surrounding the use of digital technology for the preservation and use of
deteriorating library materials, which subsequent projects will need to
examine.  Much work remains.

SESSION III

Howard BESSER                      Networking Multimedia Databases

What do we have to consider in building and distributing databases of
visual materials in a multi-user environment?  This presentation examines
a variety of concerns that need to be addressed before a multimedia
database can be set up in a networked environment.

In the past it has not been feasible to implement databases of visual
materials in shared-user environments because of technological barriers. 
Each of the two basic models for multi-user multimedia databases has
posed its own problem.  The analog multimedia storage model (represented
by Project Athena's parallel analog and digital networks) has required an
incredibly complex (and expensive) infrastructure.  The economies of
scale that make multi-user setups cheaper per user served do not operate
in an environment that requires a computer workstation, videodisc player,
and two display devices for each user.

The digital multimedia storage model has required vast amounts of storage
space (as much as one gigabyte per thirty still images).  In the past the
cost of such a large amount of storage space made this model a
prohibitive choice as well.  But plunging storage costs are finally
making this second alternative viable.

If storage no longer poses such an impediment, what do we need to
consider in building digitally stored multi-user databases of visual
materials?  This presentation will examine the networking and
telecommunication constraints that must be overcome before such databases
can become commonplace and useful to a large number of people.

The key problem is the vast size of multimedia documents, and how this
affects not only storage but telecommunications transmission time. 
Anything slower than T-1 speed is impractical for files of 1 megabyte or
larger (which is likely to be small for a multimedia document).  For
instance, even on a 56 Kb line it would take three minutes to transfer a
1-megabyte file.  And these figures assume ideal circumstances, and do
not take into consideration other users contending for network bandwidth,
disk access time, or the time needed for remote display.  Current common
telephone transmission rates would be completely impractical; few users
would be willing to wait the hour necessary to transmit a single image at
2400 baud.

This necessitates compression, which itself raises a number of other
issues.  In order to decrease file sizes significantly, we must employ
lossy compression algorithms.  But how much quality can we afford to
lose?  To date there has been only one significant study done of
image-quality needs for a particular user group, and this study did not
look at loss resulting from compression.  Only after identifying
image-quality needs can we begin to address storage and network bandwidth
needs.

Experience with X-Windows-based applications (such as Imagequery, the
University of California at Berkeley image database) demonstrates the
utility of a client-server topology, but also points to the limitation of
current software for a distributed environment.  For example,
applications like Imagequery can incorporate compression, but current X
implementations do not permit decompression at the end user's
workstation.  Such decompression at the host computer alleviates storage
capacity problems while doing nothing to address problems of
telecommunications bandwidth.

We need to examine the effects on network through-put of moving
multimedia documents around on a network.  We need to examine various
topologies that will help us avoid bottlenecks around servers and
gateways.  Experience with applications such as these raise still broader
questions. How closely is the multimedia document tied to the software
for viewing it?  Can it be accessed and viewed from other applications? 
Experience with the MARC format (and more recently with the Z39.50
protocols) shows how useful it can be to store documents in a form in
which they can be accessed by a variety of application software.

Finally, from an intellectual-access standpoint, we need to address the
issue of providing access to these multimedia documents in
interdisciplinary environments.  We need to examine terminology and
indexing strategies that will allow us to provide access to this material
in a cross-disciplinary way.

Ronald LARSEN            Directions in High-Performance Networking for
                         Libraries

The pace at which computing technology has advanced over the past forty
years shows no sign of abating.  Roughly speaking, each five-year period
has yielded an order-of-magnitude improvement in price and performance of
computing equipment.  No fundamental hurdles are likely to prevent this
pace from continuing for at least the next decade.  It is only in the
past five years, though, that computing has become ubiquitous in
libraries, affecting all staff and patrons, directly or indirectly.

During these same five years, communications rates on the Internet, the
principal academic computing network, have grown from 56 kbps to 1.5
Mbps, and the NSFNet backbone is now running 45 Mbps.  Over the next five
years, communication rates on the backbone are expected to exceed 1 Gbps. 
Growth in both the population of network users and the volume of network
traffic  has continued to grow geometrically, at rates approaching 15
percent per month.  This flood of capacity and use, likened by some to
"drinking from a firehose,"  creates immense opportunities and challenges
for libraries.  Libraries must anticipate the future implications of this
technology, participate in its development, and deploy it to ensure
access to the world's information resources.

The infrastructure for the information age is being put in place. 
Libraries face strategic decisions about their role in the development,
deployment, and use of this infrastructure.  The emerging infrastructure
is much more than computers and communication lines.  It is more than the
ability to compute at a remote site, send electronic mail to a peer
across the country, or move a file from one library to another.  The next
five years will witness substantial development of the information
infrastructure of the network.

In order to provide appropriate leadership, library professionals must
have a fundamental understanding of and appreciation for computer
networking, from local area networks to the National Research and
Education Network (NREN).  This presentation addresses these
fundamentals, and how they relate to libraries today and in the near
future.

Edwin BROWNRIGG               Electronic Library Visions and Realities

The electronic library has been a vision desired by many--and rejected by
some--since Vannevar Bush coined the term memex to describe an automated,
intelligent, personal information system.  Variations on this vision have
included Ted Nelson's Xanadau, Alan Kay's Dynabook, and Lancaster's
"paperless library," with the most recent incarnation being the
"Knowledge Navigator" described by John Scully of Apple.  But the reality
of library service has been less visionary and the leap to the electronic
library has eluded universities, publishers, and information technology
files.

The Memex Research Institute (MemRI), an independent, nonprofit research
and development organization, has created an Electronic Library Program
of shared research and development in order to make the collective vision
more concrete.  The program is working toward the creation of large,
indexed publicly available electronic image collections of published
documents in academic, special, and public libraries.  This strategic
plan is the result of the first stage of the program, which has been an
investigation of the information technologies available to support such
an effort, the economic parameters of electronic service compared to
traditional library operations, and the business and political factors
affecting the shift from print distribution to electronic networked
access.

The strategic plan envisions a combination of publicly searchable access
databases, image (and text) document collections stored on network "file
servers," local and remote network access, and an intellectual property
management-control system.  This combination of technology and
information content is defined in this plan as an E-library or E-library
collection.  Some participating sponsors are already developing projects
based on MemRI's recommended directions.

The E-library strategy projected in this plan is a visionary one that can
enable major changes and improvements in academic, public, and special
library service.  This vision is, though, one that can be realized with
today's technology.  At the same time, it will challenge the political
and social structure within which libraries operate:  in academic
libraries, the traditional emphasis on local collections, extending to
accreditation issues; in public libraries, the potential of electronic
branch and central libraries fully available to the public; and for
special libraries, new opportunities for shared collections and networks.

The environment in which this strategic plan has been developed is, at
the moment, dominated by a sense of library limits.  The continued
expansion and rapid growth of local academic library collections is now
clearly at an end.  Corporate libraries, and even law libraries, are
faced with operating within a difficult economic climate, as well as with
very active competition from commercial information sources.  For
example, public libraries may be seen as a desirable but not critical
municipal service in a time when the budgets of safety and health
agencies are being cut back.

Further, libraries in general have a very high labor-to-cost ratio in
their budgets, and labor costs are still increasing, notwithstanding
automation investments.  It is difficult for libraries to obtain capital,
startup, or seed funding for innovative activities, and those
technology-intensive initiatives that offer the potential of decreased
labor costs can provoke the opposition of library staff.

However, libraries have achieved some considerable successes in the past
two decades by improving both their service and their credibility within
their organizations--and these positive changes have been accomplished
mostly with judicious use of information technologies.  The advances in
computing and information technology have been well-chronicled:  the
continuing precipitous drop in computing costs, the growth of the
Internet and private networks, and the explosive increase in publicly
available information databases.

For example, OCLC has become one of the largest computer network
organizations in the world by creating a cooperative cataloging network
of more than 6,000 libraries worldwide.  On-line public access catalogs
now serve millions of users on more than 50,000 dedicated terminals in
the United States alone.  The University of California MELVYL on-line
catalog system has now expanded into an index database reference service
and supports more than six million searches a year.  And, libraries have
become the largest group of customers of CD-ROM publishing technology;
more than 30,000 optical media publications such as those offered by
InfoTrac and Silver Platter are subscribed to by U.S. libraries.

This march of technology continues and in the next decade will result in
further innovations that are extremely difficult to predict.  What is
clear is that libraries can now go beyond automation of their order files
and catalogs to automation of their collections themselves--and it is
possible to circumvent the fiscal limitations that appear to obtain
today.

This Electronic Library Strategic Plan recommends a paradigm shift in
library service, and demonstrates the steps necessary to provide improved
library services with limited capacities and operating investments.

SESSION IV-A

Anne KENNEY

The Cornell/Xerox Joint Study in Digital Preservation resulted in the
recording of 1,000 brittle books as 600-dpi digital images and the
production, on demand, of high-quality and archivally sound paper
replacements.  The project, which was supported by the Commission on
Preservation and Access, also investigated some of the issues surrounding
scanning, storing, retrieving, and providing access to digital images in
a network environment.

Anne Kenney will focus on some of the issues surrounding direct scanning
as identified in the Cornell Xerox Project.  Among those to be discussed
are:  image versus text capture; indexing and access; image-capture
capabilities; a comparison to photocopy and microfilm; production and
cost analysis; storage formats, protocols, and standards; and the use of
this scanning technology for preservation purposes.

The 600-dpi digital images produced in the Cornell Xerox Project proved
highly acceptable for creating paper replacements of deteriorating
originals.  The 1,000 scanned volumes provided an array of image-capture
challenges that are common to nineteenth-century printing techniques and
embrittled material, and that defy the use of text-conversion processes. 
These challenges include diminished contrast between text and background,
fragile and deteriorated pages, uneven printing, elaborate type faces,
faint and bold text adjacency, handwritten text and annotations, nonRoman
languages, and a proliferation of illustrated material embedded in text. 
The latter category included high-frequency and low-frequency halftones,
continuous tone photographs, intricate mathematical drawings, maps,
etchings, reverse-polarity drawings, and engravings.

The Xerox prototype scanning system provided a number of important
features for capturing this diverse material.  Technicians used multiple
threshold settings, filters, line art and halftone definitions,
autosegmentation, windowing, and software-editing programs to optimize
image capture.  At the same time, this project focused on production. 
The goal was to make scanning as affordable and acceptable as
photocopying and microfilming for preservation reformatting.  A
time-and-cost study conducted during the last three months of this
project confirmed the economic viability of digital scanning, and these
findings will be discussed here.

From the outset, the Cornell Xerox Project was predicated on the use of
nonproprietary standards and the use of common protocols when standards
did not exist.  Digital files were created as TIFF images which were
compressed prior to storage using Group 4 CCITT compression.  The Xerox
software is MS DOS based and utilizes off-the shelf programs such as
Microsoft Windows and Wang Image Wizard.  The digital library is designed
to be hardware-independent and to provide interchangeability with other
institutions through network connections.  Access to the digital files
themselves is two-tiered:  Bibliographic records for the computer files
are created in RLIN and Cornell's local system and access into the actual
digital images comprising a book is provided through a document control
structure and a networked image file-server, both of which will be
described.

The presentation will conclude with a discussion of some of the issues
surrounding the use of this technology as a preservation tool (storage,
refreshing, backup).

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

The National Agricultural Library (NAL) has had extensive experience with
raster scanning of printed materials.  Since 1987, the Library has
participated in the National Agricultural Text Digitizing Project (NATDP)
a cooperative effort between NAL and forty-five land grant university
libraries.  An overview of the project will be presented, giving its
history and NAL's strategy for the future.

An in-depth discussion of NATDP will follow, including a description of
the scanning process, from the gathering of the printed materials to the
archiving of the electronic pages.  The type of equipment required for a
stand-alone scanning workstation and the importance of file management
software will be discussed.  Issues concerning the images themselves will
be addressed briefly, such as image format; black and white versus color;
gray scale versus dithering; and resolution.

Also described will be a study currently in progress by NAL to evaluate
the usefulness of converting microfilm to electronic images in order to
improve access.  With the cooperation of Tuskegee University, NAL has
selected three reels of microfilm from a collection of sixty-seven reels
containing the papers, letters, and drawings of George Washington Carver. 
The three reels were converted into 3,500 electronic images using a
specialized microfilm scanner.  The selection, filming, and indexing of
this material will be discussed.

Donald WATERS

Project Open Book, the Yale University Library's effort to convert 10,
000 books from microfilm to digital imagery, is currently in an advanced
state of planning and organization.  The Yale Library has selected a
major vendor to serve as a partner in the project and as systems
integrator.  In its proposal, the successful vendor helped isolate areas
of risk and uncertainty as well as key issues to be addressed during the
life of the project.  The Yale Library is now poised to decide what
material it will convert to digital image form and to seek funding,
initially for the first phase and then for the entire project.

The proposal that Yale accepted for the implementation of Project Open
Book will provide at the end of three phases a conversion subsystem,
browsing stations distributed on the campus network within the Yale
Library, a subsystem for storing 10,000 books at 200 and 600 dots per
inch, and network access to the image printers.  Pricing for the system
implementation assumes the existence of Yale's campus ethernet network
and its high-speed image printers, and includes other requisite hardware
and software, as well as system integration services.  Proposed operating
costs include hardware and software maintenance, but do not include
estimates for the facilities management of the storage devices and image
servers.

Yale selected its vendor partner in a formal process, partly funded by
the Commission for Preservation and Access.  Following a request for
proposal, the Yale Library selected two vendors as finalists to work with
Yale staff to generate a detailed analysis of requirements for Project
Open Book.  Each vendor used the results of the requirements analysis to
generate and submit a formal proposal for the entire project.  This
competitive process not only enabled the Yale Library to select its
primary vendor partner but also revealed much about the state of the
imaging industry, about the varying, corporate commitments to the markets
for imaging technology, and about the varying organizational dynamics
through which major companies are responding to and seeking to develop
these markets.

Project Open Book is focused specifically on the conversion of images
from microfilm to digital form.  The technology for scanning microfilm is
readily available but is changing rapidly.  In its project requirements,
the Yale Library emphasized features of the technology that affect the
technical quality of digital image production and the costs of creating
and storing the image library:  What levels of digital resolution can be
achieved by scanning microfilm?  How does variation in the quality of
microfilm, particularly in film produced to preservation standards,
affect the quality of the digital images?  What technologies can an
operator effectively and economically apply when scanning film to
separate two-up images and to control for and correct image
imperfections?  How can quality control best be integrated into
digitizing work flow that includes document indexing and storage?

The actual and expected uses of digital images--storage, browsing,
printing, and OCR--help determine the standards for measuring their
quality.  Browsing is especially important, but the facilities available
for readers to browse image documents is perhaps the weakest aspect of
imaging technology and most in need of development.  As it defined its
requirements, the Yale Library concentrated on some fundamental aspects
of usability for image documents:  Does the system have sufficient
flexibility to handle the full range of document types, including
monographs, multi-part and multivolume sets, and serials, as well as
manuscript collections?  What conventions are necessary to identify a
document uniquely for storage and retrieval?  Where is the database of
record for storing bibliographic information about the image document? 
How are basic internal structures of documents, such as pagination, made
accessible to the reader?  How are the image documents physically
presented on the screen to the reader?

The Yale Library designed Project Open Book on the assumption that
microfilm is more than adequate as a medium for preserving the content of
deteriorated library materials.  As planning in the project has advanced,
it is increasingly clear that the challenge of digital image technology
and the key to the success of efforts like Project Open Book is to
provide a means of both preserving and improving access to those
deteriorated materials.

SESSION IV-B

George THOMA

In the use of electronic imaging for document preservation, there are
several issues to consider, such as:  ensuring adequate image quality,
maintaining substantial conversion rates (through-put), providing unique
identification for automated access and retrieval, and accommodating
bound volumes and fragile material.

To maintain high image quality, image processing functions are required
to correct the deficiencies in the scanned image.  Some commercially
available systems include these functions, while some do not.  The
scanned raw image must be processed to correct contrast deficiencies--
both poor overall contrast resulting from light print and/or dark
background, and variable contrast resulting from stains and
bleed-through.  Furthermore, the scan density must be adequate to allow
legibility of print and sufficient fidelity in the pseudo-halftoned gray
material.  Borders or page-edge effects must be removed for both
compactibility and aesthetics.  Page skew must be corrected for aesthetic
reasons and to enable accurate character recognition if desired. 
Compound images consisting of both two-toned text and gray-scale
illustrations must be processed appropriately to retain the quality of
each.

SESSION IV-C

Jean BARONAS

Standards publications being developed by scientists, engineers, and
business managers in Association for Information and Image Management
(AIIM) standards committees can be applied to electronic image management
(EIM) processes including:  document (image) transfer, retrieval and
evaluation; optical disk and document scanning; and document design and
conversion.  When combined with EIM system planning and operations,
standards can assist in generating image databases that are
interchangeable among a variety of systems.  The applications of
different approaches for image-tagging, indexing, compression, and
transfer often cause uncertainty concerning EIM system compatibility,
calibration, performance, and upward compatibility, until standard
implementation parameters are established.  The AIIM standards that are
being developed for these applications can be used to decrease the
uncertainty, successfully integrate imaging processes, and promote "open
systems."  AIIM is an accredited American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) standards developer with more than twenty committees comprised of
300 volunteers representing users, vendors, and manufacturers.  The
standards publications that are developed in these committees have
national acceptance and provide the basis for international harmonization
in the development of new International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) standards.

This presentation describes the development of AIIM's EIM standards and a
new effort at AIIM, a database on standards projects in a wide framework
of imaging industries including capture, recording, processing,
duplication, distribution, display, evaluation, and preservation.  The
AIIM Imagery Database will cover imaging standards being developed by
many organizations in many different countries.  It will contain
standards publications' dates, origins, related national and
international projects, status, key words, and abstracts.  The ANSI Image
Technology Standards Board requested that such a database be established,
as did the ISO/International Electrotechnical Commission Joint Task Force
on Imagery.  AIIM will take on the leadership role for the database and
coordinate its development with several standards developers.

Patricia BATTIN

     Characteristics of standards for digital imagery:

          * Nature of digital technology implies continuing volatility.

          * Precipitous standard-setting not possible and probably not
          desirable.

          * Standards are a complex issue involving the medium, the
          hardware, the software, and the technical capacity for
          reproductive fidelity and clarity.

          * The prognosis for reliable archival standards (as defined by
          librarians) in the foreseeable future is poor.

     Significant potential and attractiveness of digital technology as a
     preservation medium and access mechanism.

     Productive use of digital imagery for preservation requires a
     reconceptualizing of preservation principles in a volatile,
     standardless world.

     Concept of managing continuing access in the digital environment
     rather than focusing on the permanence of the medium and long-term
     archival standards developed for the analog world.

     Transition period:  How long and what to do?

          *  Redefine "archival."

          *  Remove the burden of "archival copy" from paper artifacts.

          *  Use digital technology for storage, develop management
          strategies for refreshing medium, hardware and software.

          *  Create acid-free paper copies for transition period backup
          until we develop reliable procedures for ensuring continuing
          access to digital files.

SESSION IV-D

Stuart WEIBEL            The Role of SGML Markup in the CORE Project (6)

The emergence of high-speed telecommunications networks as a basic
feature of the scholarly workplace is driving the demand for electronic
document delivery.  Three distinct categories of electronic
publishing/republishing are necessary to support access demands in this
emerging environment:

     1.)  Conversion of paper or microfilm archives to electronic format
     2.)  Conversion of electronic files to formats tailored to
          electronic retrieval and display
     3.)  Primary electronic publishing (materials for which the
          electronic version is the primary format)

OCLC has experimental or product development activities in each of these
areas.  Among the challenges that lie ahead is the integration of these
three types of information stores in coherent distributed systems.

The CORE (Chemistry Online Retrieval Experiment) Project is a model for
the conversion of large text and graphics collections for which
electronic typesetting files are available (category 2).  The American
Chemical Society has made available computer typography files dating from
1980 for its twenty journals.  This collection of some 250 journal-years
is being converted to an electronic format that will be accessible
through several end-user applications.

The use of Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) offers the means
to capture the structural richness of the original articles in a way that
will support a variety of retrieval, navigation, and display options
necessary to navigate effectively in very large text databases.

An SGML document consists of text that is marked up with descriptive tags
that specify the function of a given element within the document.  As a
formal language construct, an SGML document can be parsed against a
document-type definition (DTD) that unambiguously defines what elements
are allowed and where in the document they can (or must) occur.  This
formalized map of article structure allows the user interface design to
be uncoupled from the underlying database system, an important step
toward interoperability.  Demonstration of this separability is a part of
the CORE project, wherein user interface designs born of very different
philosophies will access the same database.

NOTES:
     (6)  The CORE project is a collaboration among Cornell University's
     Mann Library, Bell Communications Research (Bellcore), the American
     Chemical Society (ACS), the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS), and
     OCLC.

Michael LESK                  The CORE Electronic Chemistry Library

A major on-line file of chemical journal literature complete with
graphics is being developed to test the usability of fully electronic
access to documents, as a joint project of Cornell University, the
American Chemical Society, the Chemical Abstracts Service, OCLC, and
Bellcore (with additional support from Sun Microsystems, Springer-Verlag,
DigitaI Equipment Corporation, Sony Corporation of America, and Apple
Computers).  Our file contains the American Chemical Society's on-line
journals, supplemented with the graphics from the paper publication.  The
indexing of the articles from Chemical Abstracts Documents is available
in both image and text format, and several different interfaces can be
used.  Our goals are (1) to assess the effectiveness and acceptability of
electronic access to primary journals as compared with paper, and (2) to
identify the most desirable functions of the user interface to an
electronic system of journals, including in particular a comparison of
page-image display with ASCII display interfaces.  Early experiments with
chemistry students on a variety of tasks suggest that searching tasks are
completed much faster with any electronic system than with paper, but
that for reading all versions of the articles are roughly equivalent.

Pamela ANDRE and Judith ZIDAR

Text conversion is far more expensive and time-consuming than image
capture alone.  NAL's experience with optical character recognition (OCR)
will be related and compared with the experience of having text rekeyed. 
What factors affect OCR accuracy?  How accurate does full text have to be
in order to be useful?  How do different users react to imperfect text? 
These are questions that will be explored.  For many, a service bureau
may be a better solution than performing the work inhouse; this will also
be discussed.

SESSION VI

Marybeth PETERS

Copyright law protects creative works.  Protection granted by the law to
authors and disseminators of works includes the right to do or authorize
the following:  reproduce the work, prepare derivative works, distribute
the work to the public, and publicly perform or display the work.  In
addition, copyright owners of sound recordings and computer programs have
the right to control rental of their works.  These rights are not
unlimited; there are a number of exceptions and limitations.

An electronic environment places strains on the copyright system. 
Copyright owners want to control uses of their work and be paid for any
use; the public wants quick and easy access at little or no cost.  The
marketplace is working in this area.  Contracts, guidelines on electronic
use, and collective licensing are in use and being refined.

Issues concerning the ability to change works without detection are more
difficult to deal with.  Questions concerning the integrity of the work
and the status of the changed version under the copyright law are to be
addressed.  These are public policy issues which require informed
dialogue.


               ***   ***   ***   ******   ***   ***   ***


                Appendix III:  DIRECTORY OF PARTICIPANTS
                         

PRESENTERS:

     Pamela Q.J. Andre
     Associate Director, Automation
     National Agricultural Library
     10301 Baltimore Boulevard
     Beltsville, MD 20705-2351
     Phone:  (301) 504-6813
     Fax:  (301) 504-7473
     E-mail:  INTERNET:  PANDRE@ASRR.ARSUSDA.GOV

     Jean Baronas, Senior Manager
     Department of Standards and Technology
     Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM)
     1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1100
     Silver Spring, MD 20910
     Phone:  (301) 587-8202
     Fax:  (301) 587-2711
     
     Patricia Battin, President
     The Commission on Preservation and Access
     1400 16th Street, N.W.
     Suite 740
     Washington, DC 20036-2217
     Phone:  (202) 939-3400
     Fax:  (202) 939-3407
     E-mail:  CPA@GWUVM.BITNET

     Howard Besser
     Centre Canadien d'Architecture
     (Canadian Center for Architecture)
     1920, rue Baile
     Montreal, Quebec H3H 2S6
     CANADA
     Phone:  (514) 939-7001
     Fax:  (514) 939-7020
     E-mail:  howard@lis.pitt.edu

     Edwin B. Brownrigg, Executive Director
     Memex Research Institute
     422 Bonita Avenue
     Roseville, CA 95678
     Phone:  (916) 784-2298
     Fax:  (916) 786-7559
     E-mail:  BITNET:  MEMEX@CALSTATE.2

     Eric M. Calaluca, Vice President
     Chadwyck-Healey, Inc.
     1101 King Street
     Alexandria, VA 223l4
     Phone:  (800) 752-05l5
     Fax:  (703) 683-7589

     James Daly
     4015 Deepwood Road
     Baltimore, MD 21218-1404
     Phone:  (410) 235-0763

     Ricky Erway, Associate Coordinator
     American Memory
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-6233
     Fax:  (202) 707-3764

     Carl Fleischhauer, Coordinator
     American Memory
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-6233
     Fax:  (202) 707-3764

     Joanne Freeman
     2000 Jefferson Park Avenue, No. 7
     Charlottesville, VA  22903
     
     Prosser Gifford
     Director for Scholarly Programs
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-1517
     Fax:  (202) 707-9898
     E-mail:  pgif@seq1.loc.gov

     Jacqueline Hess, Director
     National Demonstration Laboratory
       for Interactive Information Technologies
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-4157
     Fax:  (202) 707-2829
     
     Susan Hockey, Director
     Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities (CETH)
     Alexander Library
     Rutgers University
     169 College Avenue
     New Brunswick, NJ 08903
     Phone:  (908) 932-1384
     Fax:  (908) 932-1386
     E-mail:  hockey@zodiac.rutgers.edu

     William L. Hooton, Vice President
     Business & Technical Development
       Imaging & Information Systems Group
     I-NET
     6430 Rockledge Drive, Suite 400
     Bethesda, MD 208l7
     Phone:  (301) 564-6750
     Fax:  (513) 564-6867

     Anne R. Kenney, Associate Director
     Department of Preservation and Conservation
     701 Olin Library
     Cornell University
     Ithaca, NY 14853
     Phone:  (607) 255-6875
     Fax:  (607) 255-9346
     E-mail:  LYDY@CORNELLA.BITNET

     Ronald L. Larsen
     Associate Director for Information Technology
     University of Maryland at College Park
     Room B0224, McKeldin Library
     College Park, MD 20742-7011
     Phone:  (301) 405-9194
     Fax:  (301) 314-9865
     E-mail:  rlarsen@libr.umd.edu

     Maria L. Lebron, Managing Editor
     The Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials
     l333 H Street, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20005
     Phone:  (202) 326-6735
     Fax:  (202) 842-2868
     E-mail:  PUBSAAAS@GWUVM.BITNET

     Michael Lesk, Executive Director
     Computer Science Research
     Bell Communications Research, Inc.
     Rm 2A-385
     445 South Street
     Morristown, NJ 07960-l9l0     
     Phone:  (201) 829-4070
     Fax:  (201) 829-5981
     E-mail:  lesk@bellcore.com (Internet) or bellcore!lesk (uucp)

     Clifford A. Lynch
     Director, Library Automation
     University of California,
        Office of the President
     300 Lakeside Drive, 8th Floor
     Oakland, CA 94612-3350
     Phone:  (510) 987-0522
     Fax:  (510) 839-3573
     E-mail:  calur@uccmvsa

     Avra Michelson
     National Archives and Records Administration
     NSZ Rm. 14N
     7th & Pennsylvania, N.W.
     Washington, D.C. 20408
     Phone:  (202) 501-5544
     Fax:  (202) 501-5533
     E-mail:  tmi@cu.nih.gov
     
     Elli Mylonas, Managing Editor
     Perseus Project
     Department of the Classics
     Harvard University
     319 Boylston Hall
     Cambridge, MA 02138
     Phone:  (617) 495-9025, (617) 495-0456 (direct)
     Fax:  (617) 496-8886
     E-mail:  Elli@IKAROS.Harvard.EDU or elli@wjh12.harvard.edu

     David Woodley Packard
     Packard Humanities Institute
     300 Second Street, Suite 201
     Los Altos, CA 94002
     Phone:  (415) 948-0150 (PHI)
     Fax:  (415) 948-5793

     Lynne K. Personius, Assistant Director
     Cornell Information Technologies for
      Scholarly Information Sources
     502 Olin Library
     Cornell University
     Ithaca, NY 14853
     Phone:  (607) 255-3393
     Fax:  (607) 255-9346
     E-mail:  JRN@CORNELLC.BITNET

     Marybeth Peters
     Policy Planning Adviser to the
       Register of Copyrights
     Library of Congress
     Office LM 403
     Phone:  (202) 707-8350
     Fax:  (202) 707-8366

     C. Michael Sperberg-McQueen
     Editor, Text Encoding Initiative
     Computer Center (M/C 135)
     University of Illinois at Chicago
     Box 6998
     Chicago, IL 60680
     Phone:  (312) 413-0317
     Fax:  (312) 996-6834
     E-mail:  u35395@uicvm..cc.uic.edu or u35395@uicvm.bitnet

     George R. Thoma, Chief
     Communications Engineering Branch
     National Library of Medicine
     8600 Rockville Pike
     Bethesda, MD 20894
     Phone:  (301) 496-4496
     Fax:  (301) 402-0341
     E-mail:  thoma@lhc.nlm.nih.gov

     Dorothy Twohig, Editor
     The Papers of George Washington
     504 Alderman Library
     University of Virginia
     Charlottesville, VA 22903-2498
     Phone:  (804) 924-0523
     Fax:  (804) 924-4337

     Susan H. Veccia, Team leader
     American Memory, User Evaluation
     Library of Congress
     American Memory Evaluation Project
     Phone:  (202) 707-9104
     Fax:  (202) 707-3764
     E-mail:  svec@seq1.loc.gov

     Donald J. Waters, Head
     Systems Office
     Yale University Library
     New Haven, CT 06520
     Phone:  (203) 432-4889
     Fax:  (203) 432-7231
     E-mail:  DWATERS@YALEVM.BITNET or DWATERS@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

     Stuart Weibel, Senior Research Scientist
     OCLC
     6565 Frantz Road
     Dublin, OH 43017
     Phone:  (614) 764-608l
     Fax:  (614) 764-2344
     E-mail:  INTERNET:  Stu@rsch.oclc.org

     Robert G. Zich
     Special Assistant to the Associate Librarian
       for Special Projects
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-6233
     Fax:  (202) 707-3764
     E-mail:  rzic@seq1.loc.gov

     Judith A. Zidar, Coordinator
     National Agricultural Text Digitizing Program
     Information Systems Division
     National Agricultural Library
     10301 Baltimore Boulevard
     Beltsville, MD 20705-2351
     Phone:  (301) 504-6813 or 504-5853
     Fax:  (301) 504-7473
     E-mail:  INTERNET:  JZIDAR@ASRR.ARSUSDA.GOV


OBSERVERS:

     Helen Aguera, Program Officer
     Division of Research
     Room 318
     National Endowment for the Humanities
     1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
     Washington, D.C. 20506
     Phone:  (202) 786-0358
     Fax:  (202) 786-0243

     M. Ellyn Blanton, Deputy Director
     National Demonstration Laboratory
       for Interactive Information Technologies
     Library of Congress
     Phone:  (202) 707-4157
     Fax:  (202) 707-2829

     Charles M. Dollar
     National Archives and Records Administration
     NSZ Rm. 14N
     7th & Pennsylvania, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20408
     Phone:  (202) 501-5532
     Fax:  (202) 501-5512

     Jeffrey Field, Deputy to the Director
     Division of Preservation and Access
     Room 802
     National Endowment for the Humanities
     1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20506
     Phone:  (202) 786-0570
     Fax:  (202) 786-0243

     Lorrin Garson
     American Chemical Society
     Research and Development Department
     1155 16th Street, N.W.
     Washington, D.C. 20036
     Phone:  (202) 872-4541
     Fax:  E-mail:  INTERNET:  LRG96@ACS.ORG

     William M. Holmes, Jr.
     National Archives and Records Administration
     NSZ Rm. 14N
     7th & Pennsylvania, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20408
     Phone:  (202) 501-5540
     Fax:  (202) 501-5512
     E-mail:  WHOLMES@AMERICAN.EDU

     Sperling Martin
     Information Resource Management
     20030 Doolittle Street
     Gaithersburg, MD 20879
     Phone:  (301) 924-1803

     Michael Neuman, Director
     The Center for Text and Technology
     Academic Computing Center
     238 Reiss Science Building
     Georgetown University
     Washington, DC 20057
     Phone:  (202) 687-6096
     Fax:  (202) 687-6003
     E-mail:  neuman@guvax.bitnet, neuman@guvax.georgetown.edu

     Barbara Paulson, Program Officer
     Division of Preservation and Access
     Room 802
     National Endowment for the Humanities
     1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20506
     Phone:  (202) 786-0577
     Fax:  (202) 786-0243
     
     Allen H. Renear
     Senior Academic Planning Analyst
     Brown University Computing and Information Services
     115 Waterman Street
     Campus Box 1885
     Providence, R.I. 02912
     Phone:  (401) 863-7312
     Fax:  (401) 863-7329
     E-mail:  BITNET:  Allen@BROWNVM or           
     INTERNET:  Allen@brownvm.brown.edu

     Susan M. Severtson, President
     Chadwyck-Healey, Inc.
     1101 King Street
     Alexandria, VA 223l4
     Phone:  (800) 752-05l5
     Fax:  (703) 683-7589     

     Frank Withrow
     U.S. Department of Education
     555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W.
     Washington, DC 20208-5644
     Phone:  (202) 219-2200
     Fax:  (202) 219-2106


(LC STAFF)
     
     Linda L. Arret
     Machine-Readable Collections Reading Room LJ 132
     (202) 707-1490

     John D. Byrum, Jr.
     Descriptive Cataloging Division LM 540
     (202) 707-5194

     Mary Jane Cavallo
     Science and Technology Division LA 5210
     (202) 707-1219

     Susan Thea David
     Congressional Research Service LM 226
     (202) 707-7169

     Robert Dierker
     Senior Adviser for Multimedia Activities LM 608
     (202) 707-6151

     William W. Ellis
     Associate Librarian for Science and Technology LM 611
     (202) 707-6928

     Ronald Gephart
     Manuscript Division LM 102
     (202) 707-5097

     James Graber
     Information Technology Services LM G51
     (202) 707-9628

     Rich Greenfield
     American Memory LM 603
     (202) 707-6233

     Rebecca Guenther
     Network Development LM 639
     (202) 707-5092

     Kenneth E. Harris
     Preservation LM G21
     (202) 707-5213

     Staley Hitchcock
     Manuscript Division LM 102
     (202) 707-5383

     Bohdan Kantor
     Office of Special Projects LM 612
     (202) 707-0180

     John W. Kimball, Jr
     Machine-Readable Collections Reading Room LJ 132
     (202) 707-6560

     Basil Manns
     Information Technology Services LM G51
     (202) 707-8345

     Sally Hart McCallum
     Network Development LM 639
     (202) 707-6237

     Dana J. Pratt
     Publishing Office LM 602
     (202) 707-6027

     Jane Riefenhauser
     American Memory LM 603
     (202) 707-6233

     William Z. Schenck
     Collections Development LM 650
     (202) 707-7706

     Chandru J. Shahani
     Preservation Research and Testing Office (R&T) LM G38
     (202) 707-5607

     William J. Sittig
     Collections Development LM 650
     (202) 707-7050

     Paul Smith
     Manuscript Division LM 102
     (202) 707-5097

     James L. Stevens
     Information Technology Services LM G51
     (202) 707-9688

     Karen Stuart
     Manuscript Division LM 130
     (202) 707-5389

     Tamara Swora
     Preservation Microfilming Office LM G05
     (202) 707-6293

     Sarah Thomas
     Collections Cataloging LM 642
     (202) 707-5333


                                   END
      *************************************************************

Note:  This file has been edited for use on computer networks.  This
editing required the removal of diacritics, underlining, and fonts such
as italics and bold.  

kde 11/92

[A few of the italics (when used for emphasis) were replaced by CAPS mh]
