No evil durst attempt thee; but I rue 
The errour now, which is become my crime, 
And thou the accuser.  Thus it shall befall 
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting, 
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook; 
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue, 
She first his weak indulgence will accuse. 
Thus they in mutual accusation spent 
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning; 
And of their vain contest appeared no end. 
 
 
 
Book X                                                           
 
 
Mean while the heinous and despiteful act 
Of Satan, done in Paradise; and how 
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve, 
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit, 
Was known in Heaven; for what can 'scape the eye 
Of God all-seeing, or deceive his heart 
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just, 
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind 
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed, 
Complete to have discovered and repulsed 
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend. 
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered, 
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit, 
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, 
(Incurred what could they less?) the penalty; 
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall. 
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste 
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad, 
For Man; for of his state by this they knew, 
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen 
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news 
From Earth arrived at Heaven-gate, displeased 
All were who heard; dim sadness did not spare 
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed 
With pity, violated not their bliss. 
About the new-arrived, in multitudes 
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know 
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme, 
Accountable, made haste, to make appear, 
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance 
And easily approved; when the Most High 
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud, 
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice. 
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned 
From unsuccessful charge; be not dismayed, 
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth, 
Which your sincerest care could not prevent; 
Foretold so lately what would come to pass, 
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell. 
I told ye then he should prevail, and speed 
On his bad errand; Man should be seduced, 
And flattered out of all, believing lies 
Against his Maker; no decree of mine 
Concurring to necessitate his fall, 
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse 
His free will, to her own inclining left 
In even scale.  But fallen he is; and now 
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass 
On his transgression,--death denounced that day? 
Which he presumes already vain and void, 
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared, 
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find 
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end. 
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned. 
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee, 
Vicegerent Son?  To thee I have transferred 
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell. 
Easy it may be seen that I intend 
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee 
Man's friend, his Mediator, his designed 
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary, 
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen. 
So spake the Father; and, unfolding bright 
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son 
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full 
Resplendent all his Father manifest 
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild. 
Father Eternal, thine is to decree; 
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will 
Supreme; that thou in me, thy Son beloved, 
Mayest ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge 
On earth these thy transgressours; but thou knowest, 
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light, 
When time shall be; for so I undertook 
Before thee; and, not repenting, this obtain 
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom 
On me derived; yet I shall temper so 
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most 
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. 
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none 
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged, 
Those two; the third best absent is condemned, 
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law: 
Conviction to the serpent none belongs. 
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose 
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers, 
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant, 
Accompanied to Heaven-gate; from whence 
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay. 
Down he descended straight; the speed of Gods 
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged. 
Now was the sun in western cadence low 
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour, 
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in 
The evening cool; when he, from wrath more cool, 
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both, 
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard 
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds 
Brought to their ears, while day declined; they heard, 
And from his presence hid themselves among 
The thickest trees, both man and wife; till God, 
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud. 
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet 
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here, 
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude, 
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought: 
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change 
Absents thee, or what chance detains?--Come forth! 
He came; and with him Eve, more loth, though first 
To offend; discountenanced both, and discomposed; 
Love was not in their looks, either to God, 
Or to each other; but apparent guilt, 
And shame, and perturbation, and despair, 
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile. 
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief. 
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice 
Afraid, being naked, hid myself.  To whom 
The gracious Judge without revile replied. 
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared, 
But still rejoiced; how is it now become 
So dreadful to thee?  That thou art naked, who 
Hath told thee?  Hast thou eaten of the tree, 
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat? 
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied. 
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand 
Before my Judge; either to undergo 
Myself the total crime, or to accuse 
My other self, the partner of my life; 
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains, 
I should conceal, and not expose to blame 
By my complaint: but strict necessity 
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint; 
Lest on my head both sin and punishment, 
However insupportable, be all 
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou 
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.-- 
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help, 
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good, 
So fit, so acceptable, so divine, 
That from her hand I could suspect no ill, 
And what she did, whatever in itself, 
Her doing seemed to justify the deed; 
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat. 
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied. 
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey 
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide, 
Superiour, or but equal, that to her 
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place 
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee, 
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled 
Hers in all real dignity?  Adorned 
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract 
Thy love, not thy subjection; and her gifts 
Were such, as under government well seemed; 
Unseemly to bear rule; which was thy part 
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright. 
So having said, he thus to Eve in few. 
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done? 
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed, 
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge 
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied. 
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat. 
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay 
To judgement he proceeded on the accused 
Serpent, though brute; unable to transfer 
The guilt on him, who made him instrument 
Of mischief, and polluted from the end 
Of his creation; justly then accursed, 
As vitiated in nature:  More to know 
Concerned not Man, (since he no further knew) 
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last 
To Satan first in sin his doom applied, 
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best: 
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall. 
Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed 
Above all cattle, each beast of the field; 
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go, 
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life. 
Between thee and the woman I will put 
Enmity, and between thine and her seed; 
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel. 
So spake this oracle, then verified 
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve, 
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven, 
Prince of the air; then, rising from his grave 
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed 
In open show; and, with ascension bright, 
Captivity led captive through the air, 
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped; 
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; 
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise; 
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned. 
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply 
By thy conception; children thou shalt bring 
In sorrow forth; and to thy husband's will 
Thine shall submit; he over thee shall rule. 
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced. 
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, 
And eaten of the tree, concerning which 
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof: 
Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thou in sorrow 
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life; 
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth 
Unbid; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, 
Till thou return unto the ground; for thou 
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth, 
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return. 
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent; 
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day, 
Removed far off; then, pitying how they stood 
Before him naked to the air, that now 
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin 
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume; 
As when he washed his servants feet; so now, 
As father of his family, he clad 
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain, 
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid; 
And thought not much to clothe his enemies; 
Nor he their outward only with the skins 
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more. 
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness, 
Arraying, covered from his Father's sight. 
To him with swift ascent he up returned, 
Into his blissful bosom reassumed 
In glory, as of old; to him appeased 
All, though all-knowing, what had passed with Man 
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. 
Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth, 
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death, 
In counterview within the gates, that now 
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame 
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through, 
Sin opening; who thus now to Death began. 
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing 
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives 
In other worlds, and happier seat provides 
For us, his offspring dear?  It cannot be 
But that success attends him; if mishap, 
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven 
By his avengers; since no place like this 
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. 
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, 
Wings growing, and dominion given me large 
Beyond this deep; whatever draws me on, 
Or sympathy, or some connatural force, 
Powerful at greatest distance to unite, 
With secret amity, things of like kind, 
By secretest conveyance.  Thou, my shade 
Inseparable, must with me along; 
For Death from Sin no power can separate. 
But, lest the difficulty of passing back 
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf 
Impassable, impervious; let us try 
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine 
Not unagreeable, to found a path 
Over this main from Hell to that new world, 
Where Satan now prevails; a monument 
Of merit high to all the infernal host, 
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse, 
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead. 
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn 
By this new-felt attraction and instinct. 
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon. 
Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong, 
Leads thee; I shall not lag behind, nor err 
The way, thou leading; such a scent I draw 
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste 
The savour of death from all things there that live: 
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest 
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. 
So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell 
Of mortal change on earth.  As when a flock 
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote, 
Against the day of battle, to a field, 
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured 
With scent of living carcasses designed 
For death, the following day, in bloody fight: 
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned 
His nostril wide into the murky air; 
Sagacious of his quarry from so far. 
Then both from out Hell-gates, into the waste 
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark, 
Flew diverse; and with power (their power was great) 
Hovering upon the waters, what they met 
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea 
Tost up and down, together crouded drove, 
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell; 
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse 
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive 
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way 
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich 
Cathaian coast.  The aggregated soil 
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry, 
As with a trident, smote; and fixed as firm 
As Delos, floating once; the rest his look 
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move; 
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate, 
Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach 
They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on 
Over the foaming deep high-arched, a bridge 
Of length prodigious, joining to the wall 
Immoveable of this now fenceless world, 
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, 
Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell. 
So, if great things to small may be compared, 
Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke, 
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high, 
Came to the sea: and, over Hellespont 
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined, 
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves. 
Now had they brought the work by wonderous art 
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock, 
Over the vexed abyss, following the track 
Of Satan to the self-same place where he 
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe 
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare 
Of this round world:  With pins of adamant 
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made 
And durable!  And now in little space 
The confines met of empyrean Heaven, 
And of this World; and, on the left hand, Hell 
With long reach interposed; three several ways 
In sight, to each of these three places led. 
And now their way to Earth they had descried, 
To Paradise first tending; when, behold! 
Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright, 
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering 
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose: 
Disguised he came; but those his children dear 
Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise. 
He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk 
Into the wood fast by; and, changing shape, 
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act 
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded 
Upon her husband; saw their shame that sought 
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend 
The Son of God to judge them, terrified 
He fled; not hoping to escape, but shun 
The present; fearing, guilty, what his wrath 
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned 
By night, and listening where the hapless pair 
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint, 
Thence gathered his own doom; which understood 
Not instant, but of future time, with joy 
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned; 
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot 
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped 
Met, who to meet him came, his offspring dear. 
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight 
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreased. 
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair 
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke. 
O Parent, these are thy magnifick deeds, 
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own; 
Thou art their author, and prime architect: 
For I no sooner in my heart divined, 
My heart, which by a secret harmony 
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet, 
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy looks 
Now also evidence, but straight I felt, 
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt, 
That I must after thee, with this thy son; 
Such fatal consequence unites us three! 
Hell could no longer hold us in our bounds, 
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure 
Detain from following thy illustrious track. 
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined 
Within Hell-gates till now; thou us impowered 
To fortify thus far, and overlay, 
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyss. 
Thine now is all this world; thy virtue hath won 
What thy hands builded not; thy wisdom gained 
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged 
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt monarch reign, 
There didst not; there let him still victor sway, 
As battle hath adjudged; from this new world 
Retiring, by his own doom alienated; 
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide 
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds, 
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world; 
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne. 
Whom thus the Prince of darkness answered glad. 
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both; 
High proof ye now have given to be the race 
Of Satan (for I glory in the name, 
Antagonist of Heaven's Almighty King,) 
Amply have merited of me, of all 
The infernal empire, that so near Heaven's door 
Triumphal with triumphal act have met, 
Mine, with this glorious work; and made one realm, 
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent 
Of easy thorough-fare.  Therefore, while I 
Descend through darkness, on your road with ease, 
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint 
With these successes, and with them rejoice; 
You two this way, among these numerous orbs, 
All yours, right down to Paradise descend; 
There dwell, and reign in bliss; thence on the earth 
Dominion exercise and in the air, 
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared; 
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. 
My substitutes I send ye, and create 
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might 
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now 
My hold of this new kingdom all depends, 
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit. 
If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell 
No detriment need fear; go, and be strong! 
So saying he dismissed them; they with speed 
Their course through thickest constellations held, 
Spreading their bane; the blasted stars looked wan, 
And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse 
Then suffered.  The other way Satan went down 
The causey to Hell-gate:  On either side 
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed, 
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed, 
That scorned his indignation:  Through the gate, 
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed, 
And all about found desolate; for those, 
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge, 
Flown to the upper world; the rest were all 
Far to the inland retired, about the walls 
Of Pandemonium; city and proud seat 
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called 
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned; 
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand 
In council sat, solicitous what chance 
Might intercept their emperour sent; so he 
Departing gave command, and they observed. 
As when the Tartar from his Russian foe, 
By Astracan, over the snowy plains, 
Retires; or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns 
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond 
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat 
To Tauris or Casbeen:  So these, the late 
Heaven-banished host, left desart utmost Hell 
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch 
Round their metropolis; and now expecting 
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search 
Of foreign worlds:  He through the midst unmarked, 
In show plebeian Angel militant 
Of lowest order, passed; and from the door 
Of that Plutonian hall, invisible 
Ascended his high throne; which, under state 
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end 
Was placed in regal lustre.  Down a while 
He sat, and round about him saw unseen: 
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head 
And shape star-bright appeared, or brighter; clad 
With what permissive glory since his fall 
Was left him, or false glitter:  All amazed 
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng 
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld, 
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaim: 
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers, 
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy 
Congratulant approached him; who with hand 
Silence, and with these words attention, won. 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
For in possession such, not only of right, 
I call ye, and declare ye now; returned 
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth 
Triumphant out of this infernal pit 
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe, 
And dungeon of our tyrant:  Now possess, 
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven 
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard 
With peril great achieved.  Long were to tell 
What I have done; what suffered;with what pain 
Voyaged th' unreal, vast, unbounded deep 
Of horrible confusion; over which 
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved, 
To expedite your glorious march; but I 
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride 
The untractable abyss, plunged in the womb 
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild; 
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed 
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar 
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found 
The new created world, which fame in Heaven 
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful 
Of absolute perfection! therein Man 
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile 
Made happy:  Him by fraud I have seduced 
From his Creator; and, the more to encrease 
Your wonder, with an apple; he, thereat 
Offended, worth your laughter! hath given up 
Both his beloved Man, and all his world, 
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, 
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm; 
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man 
To rule, as over all he should have ruled. 
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather 
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape 
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs, 
Is enmity which he will put between 
Me and mankind; I am to bruise his heel; 
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head: 
A world who would not purchase with a bruise, 
Or much more grievous pain?--Ye have the account 
Of my performance:  What remains, ye Gods, 
But up, and enter now into full bliss? 
So having said, a while he stood, expecting 
Their universal shout, and high applause, 
To fill his ear; when, contrary, he hears 
On all sides, from innumerable tongues, 
A dismal universal hiss, the sound 
Of publick scorn; he wondered, but not long 
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more, 
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare; 
His arms clung to his ribs; his legs entwining 
Each other, till supplanted down he fell 
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone, 
Reluctant, but in vain; a greater power 
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned, 
According to his doom: he would have spoke, 
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue 
To forked tongue; for now were all transformed 
Alike, to serpents all, as accessories 
To his bold riot:  Dreadful was the din 
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now 
With complicated monsters head and tail, 
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire, 
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear, 
And Dipsas; (not so thick swarmed once the soil 
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle 
Ophiusa,) but still greatest he the midst, 
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun 
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime, 
Huge Python, and his power no less he seemed 
Above the rest still to retain; they all 
Him followed, issuing forth to the open field, 
Where all yet left of that revolted rout, 
Heaven-fallen, in station stood or just array; 
Sublime with expectation when to see 
In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief; 
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud 
Of ugly serpents; horrour on them fell, 
And horrid sympathy; for, what they saw, 
They felt themselves, now changing; down their arms, 
Down fell both spear and shield; down they as fast; 
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form 
Catched, by contagion; like in punishment, 
As in their crime.  Thus was the applause they meant, 
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame 
Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood 
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change, 
His will who reigns above, to aggravate 
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that 
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve 
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange 
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining 
For one forbidden tree a multitude 
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame; 
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce, 
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain; 
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees 
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks 
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked 
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew 
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed; 
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste 
Deceived; they, fondly thinking to allay 
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit 
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste 
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed, 
Hunger and thirst constraining; drugged as oft, 
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws, 
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell 
Into the same illusion, not as Man 
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued 
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss, 
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed; 
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo, 
This annual humbling certain numbered days, 
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced. 
However, some tradition they dispersed 
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got, 
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called 
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide-- 
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule 
Of high Olympus; thence by Saturn driven 
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born. 
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair 
Too soon arrived; Sin, there in power before, 
Once actual; now in body, and to dwell 
Habitual habitant; behind her Death, 
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet 
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began. 
Second of Satan sprung, all-conquering Death! 
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned 
With travel difficult, not better far 
Than still at Hell's dark threshold to have sat watch, 
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved? 
Whom thus the Sin-born monster answered soon. 
To me, who with eternal famine pine, 
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven; 
There best, where most with ravine I may meet; 
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems 
To stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps. 
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied. 
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers, 
Feed first; on each beast next, and fish, and fowl; 
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing 
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared; 
Till I, in Man residing, through the race, 
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect; 
And season him thy last and sweetest prey. 
This said, they both betook them several ways, 
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make 
All kinds, and for destruction to mature 
Sooner or later; which the Almighty seeing, 
From his transcendent seat the Saints among, 
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice. 
See, with what heat these dogs of Hell advance 
To waste and havock yonder world, which I 
So fair and good created; and had still 
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man 
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute 
Folly to me; so doth the Prince of Hell 
And his adherents, that with so much ease 
I suffer them to enter and possess 
A place so heavenly; and, conniving, seem 
To gratify my scornful enemies, 
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit 
Of passion, I to them had quitted all, 
At random yielded up to their misrule; 
And know not that I called, and drew them thither, 
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth 
Which Man's polluting sin with taint hath shed 
On what was pure; til, crammed and gorged, nigh burst 
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling 
Of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing Son, 
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last, 
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell 
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws. 
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure 
To sanctity, that shall receive no stain: 
Till then, the curse pronounced on both precedes. 
He ended, and the heavenly audience loud 
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas, 
Through multitude that sung:  Just are thy ways, 
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works; 
Who can extenuate thee?  Next, to the Son, 
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom 
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise, 
Or down from Heaven descend.--Such was their song; 
While the Creator, calling forth by name 
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge, 
As sorted best with present things.  The sun 
Had first his precept so to move, so shine, 
As might affect the earth with cold and heat 
Scarce tolerable; and from the north to call 
Decrepit winter; from the south to bring 
Solstitial summer's heat.  To the blanc moon 
Her office they prescribed; to the other five 
Their planetary motions, and aspects, 
In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite, 
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join 
In synod unbenign; and taught the fixed 
Their influence malignant when to shower, 
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling, 
Should prove tempestuous:  To the winds they set 
Their corners, when with bluster to confound 
Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roll 
With terrour through the dark aereal hall. 
Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse 
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees and more, 
From the sun's axle; they with labour pushed 
Oblique the centrick globe:  Some say, the sun 
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road 
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven 
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins, 
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain 
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales, 
As deep as Capricorn; to bring in change 
Of seasons to each clime; else had the spring 
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers, 
Equal in days and nights, except to those 
Beyond the polar circles; to them day 
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun, 
To recompense his distance, in their sight 
Had rounded still the horizon, and not known 
Or east or west; which had forbid the snow 
From cold Estotiland, and south as far 
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted fruit 
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned 
His course intended; else, how had the world 
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now, 
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat? 
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced 
Like change on sea and land; sideral blast, 
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot, 
Corrupt and pestilent:  Now from the north 
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore, 
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice, 
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw, 
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud, 
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn; 
With adverse blast upturns them from the south 
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds 
From Serraliona; thwart of these, as fierce, 
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise, 
Sirocco and Libecchio.  Thus began 
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first, 
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational 
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy: 
Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl, 
And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving, 
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe 
Of Man, but fled him; or, with countenance grim, 
Glared on him passing.  These were from without 
The growing miseries, which Adam saw 
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, 
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within; 
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost, 
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint. 
O miserable of happy!  Is this the end 
Of this new glorious world, and me so late 
The glory of that glory, who now become 
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face 
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth 
Of happiness!--Yet well, if here would end 
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear 
My own deservings; but this will not serve: 
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget, 
Is propagated curse.  O voice, once heard 
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply; 
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease, 
Or multiply, but curses on my head? 
Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling 
The evil on him brought by me, will curse 
My head?  Ill fare our ancestor impure, 
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks 
Shall be the execration: so, besides 
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me 
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound; 
On me, as on their natural center, light 
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys 
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes! 
Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee 
From darkness to promote me, or here place 
In this delicious garden?  As my will 
Concurred not to my being, it were but right 
And equal to reduce me to my dust; 
Desirous to resign and render back 
All I received; unable to perform 
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold 
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that, 
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added 
The sense of endless woes?  Inexplicable 
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out 
To deathless pain?  How gladly would I meet 
Mortality my sentence, and be earth 
Insensible!  How glad would lay me down 
As in my mother's lap!  There I should rest, 
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more 
Would thunder in my ears; no fear of worse 
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me 
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt 
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die; 
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man 
Which God inspired, cannot together perish 
With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave, 
Or in some other dismal place, who knows 
But I shall die a living death?  O thought 
Horrid, if true!  Yet why? It was but breath 
Of life that sinned; what dies but what had life 
And sin?  The body properly had neither, 
All of me then shall die: let this appease 
The doubt, since human reach no further knows. 
For though the Lord of all be infinite, 
Is his wrath also?  Be it, Man is not so, 
But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise 
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end? 
Can he make deathless death?  That were to make 
Strange contradiction, which to God himself 
Impossible is held; as argument 
Of weakness, not of power.  Will he draw out, 
For anger's sake, finite to infinite, 
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour, 
Satisfied never?  That were to extend 
His sentence beyond dust and Nature's law; 
By which all causes else, according still 
To the reception of their matter, act; 
Not to the extent of their own sphere.  But say 
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed, 
Bereaving sense, but endless misery 
From this day onward; which I feel begun 
Both in me, and without me; and so last 
To perpetuity;--Ay me!that fear 
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution 
On my defenceless head; both Death and I 
Am found eternal, and incorporate both; 
Nor I on my part single; in me all 
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony 
That I must leave ye, Sons!  O, were I able 
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none! 
So disinherited, how would you bless 
Me, now your curse!  Ah, why should all mankind, 
For one man's fault, thus guiltless be condemned, 
It guiltless?  But from me what can proceed, 
But all corrupt; both mind and will depraved 
Not to do only, but to will the same 
With me?  How can they then acquitted stand 
In sight of God?  Him, after all disputes, 
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain, 
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still 
But to my own conviction: first and last 
On me, me only, as the source and spring 
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; 
So might the wrath!  Fond wish!couldst thou support 
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear; 
Than all the world much heavier, though divided 
With that bad Woman?  Thus, what thou desirest, 
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope 
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable 
Beyond all past example and future; 
To Satan only like both crime and doom. 
O Conscience! into what abyss of fears 
And horrours hast thou driven me; out of which 
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged! 
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud, 
Through the still night; not now, as ere Man fell, 
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air 
Accompanied; with damps, and dreadful gloom; 
Which to his evil conscience represented 
All things with double terrour:  On the ground 
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground; and oft 
Cursed his creation;  Death as oft accused 
Of tardy execution, since denounced 
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death, 
Said he, with one thrice-acceptable stroke 
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word, 
Justice Divine not hasten to be just? 
But Death comes not at call; Justice Divine 
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries, 
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers! 
With other echo late I taught your shades 
To answer, and resound far other song.-- 
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld, 
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh, 
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed: 
But her with stern regard he thus repelled. 
Out of my sight, thou Serpent!  That name best 
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false 
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, 
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show 
Thy inward fraud; to warn all creatures from thee 
Henceforth; lest that too heavenly form, pretended 
To hellish falshood, snare them!  But for thee 
I had persisted happy; had not thy pride 
And wandering vanity, when least was safe, 
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained 
Not to be trusted; longing to be seen, 
Though by the Devil himself; him overweening 
To over-reach; but, with the serpent meeting, 
Fooled and beguiled; by him thou, I by thee 
To trust thee from my side; imagined wise, 
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults; 
And understood not all was but a show, 
Rather than solid virtue; all but a rib 
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears, 
More to the part sinister, from me drawn; 
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary 
To my just number found.  O! why did God, 
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven 
With Spirits masculine, create at last 
This novelty on earth, this fair defect 
Of nature, and not fill the world at once 
With Men, as Angels, without feminine; 
Or find some other way to generate 
Mankind?  This mischief had not been befallen, 
And more that shall befall; innumerable 
Disturbances on earth through female snares, 
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either 
He never shall find out fit mate, but such 
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake; 
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain 
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained 
By a far worse; or, if she love, withheld 
By parents; or his happiest choice too late 
Shall meet, already linked and wedlock-bound 
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame: 
Which infinite calamity shall cause 
To human life, and houshold peace confound. 
He added not, and from her turned; but Eve, 
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing 
And tresses all disordered, at his feet 
Fell humble; and, embracing them, besought 
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. 
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven 
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart 
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended, 
Unhappily deceived!  Thy suppliant 
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, 
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, 
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress, 
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee, 
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? 
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps, 
Between us two let there be peace; both joining, 
As joined in injuries, one enmity 
Against a foe by doom express assigned us, 
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not 
Thy hatred for this misery befallen; 
On me already lost, me than thyself 
More miserable!  Both have sinned;but thou 
Against God only; I against God and thee; 
And to the place of judgement will return, 
There with my cries importune Heaven; that all 
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light 
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe; 
Me, me only, just object of his ire! 
She ended weeping; and her lowly plight, 
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault 
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought 
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented 
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight, 
Now at his feet submissive in distress; 
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking, 
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid: 
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost, 
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon. 
Unwary, and too desirous, as before, 
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest 
The punishment all on thyself; alas! 
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain 
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part, 
And my displeasure bearest so ill.  If prayers 
Could alter high decrees, I to that place 
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, 
That on my head all might be visited; 
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven, 
To me committed, and by me exposed. 
But rise;--let us no more contend, nor blame 
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere; but strive 
In offices of love, how we may lighten 
Each other's burden, in our share of woe; 
Since this day's death denounced, if aught I see, 
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-paced evil; 
A long day's dying, to augment our pain; 
And to our seed (O hapless seed!) derived. 
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied. 
Adam, by sad experiment I know 
How little weight my words with thee can find, 
Found so erroneous; thence by just event 
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless, 
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place 
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain 
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart 
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide 
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen, 
Tending to some relief of our extremes, 
Or end; though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, 
As in our evils, and of easier choice. 
If care of our descent perplex us most, 
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured 
By Death at last; and miserable it is 
To be to others cause of misery, 
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring 
Into this cursed world a woeful race, 
That after wretched life must be at last 
Food for so foul a monster; in thy power 
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent 
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot. 
Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death 
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two 
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw. 
But if thou judge it hard and difficult, 
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain 
From love's due rights, nuptial embraces sweet; 
And with desire to languish without hope, 
Before the present object languishing 
With like desire; which would be misery 
And torment less than none of what we dread; 
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free 
From what we fear for both, let us make short, -- 
Let us seek Death; -- or, he not found, supply 
With our own hands his office on ourselves: 
Why stand we longer shivering under fears, 
That show no end but death, and have the power, 
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing, 
Destruction with destruction to destroy? -- 
She ended here, or vehement despair 
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts 
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale. 
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed, 
To better hopes his more attentive mind 
Labouring had raised; and thus to Eve replied. 
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems 
To argue in thee something more sublime 
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns; 
But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes 
That excellence thought in thee; and implies, 
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret 
For loss of life and pleasure overloved. 
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end 
Of misery, so thinking to evade 
The penalty pronounced; doubt not but God 
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so 
To be forestalled; much more I fear lest death, 
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain 
We are by doom to pay; rather, such acts 
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest 
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek 
Some safer resolution, which methinks 
I have in view, calling to mind with heed 
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise 
The Serpent's head; piteous amends! unless 
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe, 
Satan; who, in the serpent, hath contrived 
Against us this deceit:  To crush his head 
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost 
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days 
Resolved, as thou proposest; so our foe 
Shal 'scape his punishment ordained, and we 
Instead shall double ours upon our heads. 
No more be mentioned then of violence 
Against ourselves; and wilful barrenness, 
That cuts us off from hope; and savours only 
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite, 
Reluctance against God and his just yoke 
Laid on our necks.  Remember with what mild 
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged, 
Without wrath or reviling; we expected 
Immediate dissolution, which we thought 
Was meant by death that day; when lo!to thee 
Pains only in child-bearing were foretold, 
And bringing forth; soon recompensed with joy, 
Fruit of thy womb:  On me the curse aslope 
Glanced on the ground; with labour I must earn 
My bread; what harm? Idleness had been worse; 
My labour will sustain me; and, lest cold 
Or heat should injure us, his timely care 
Hath, unbesought, provided; and his hands 
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged; 
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear 
Be open, and his heart to pity incline, 
And teach us further by what means to shun 
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow! 
Which now the sky, with various face, begins 
To show us in this mountain; while the winds 
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks 
Of these fair spreading trees; which bids us seek 
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish 
Our limbs benummed, ere this diurnal star 
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams 
Reflected may with matter sere foment; 
Or, by collision of two bodies, grind 
The air attrite to fire; as late the clouds 
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock, 
Tine the slant lightning; whose thwart flame, driven down 
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine; 
And sends a comfortable heat from far, 
Which might supply the sun:  Such fire to use, 
And what may else be remedy or cure 
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, 
He will instruct us praying, and of grace 
Beseeching him; so as we need not fear 
To pass commodiously this life, sustained 
By him with many comforts, till we end 
In dust, our final rest and native home. 
What better can we do, than, to the place 
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall 
Before him reverent; and there confess 
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek 
 
 
 
Book XI                                                          
 
 
Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn 
From his displeasure; in whose look serene, 
When angry most he seemed and most severe, 
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone? 
So spake our father penitent; nor Eve 
Felt less remorse: they, forthwith to the place 
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell 
Before him reverent; and both confessed 
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek. 
Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood 
Praying; for from the mercy-seat above 
Prevenient grace descending had removed 
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh 
Regenerate grow instead; that sighs now breathed 
Unutterable; which the Spirit of prayer 
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight 
Than loudest oratory:  Yet their port 
Not of mean suitors; nor important less 
Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair 
In fables old, less ancient yet than these, 
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore 
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine 
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers 
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds 
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed 
Dimensionless through heavenly doors; then clad 
With incense, where the golden altar fumed, 
By their great intercessour, came in sight 
Before the Father's throne: them the glad Son 
Presenting, thus to intercede began. 
See$ Father, what first-fruits on earth are sprung 
From thy implanted grace in Man; these sighs 
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed 
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring; 
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed 
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those 
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees 
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen 
From innocence.  Now therefore, bend thine ear 
To supplication; hear his sighs, though mute; 
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me 
Interpret for him; me, his advocate 
And propitiation; all his works on me, 
Good, or not good, ingraft; my merit those 
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay. 
Accept me; and, in me, from these receive 
The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live 
Before thee reconciled, at least his days 
Numbered, though sad; till death, his doom, (which I 
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,) 
To better life shall yield him: where with me 
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss; 
Made one with me, as I with thee am one. 
To whom the Father, without cloud, serene. 
All thy request for Man, accepted Son, 
Obtain; all thy request was my decree: 
But, longer in that Paradise to dwell, 
The law I gave to Nature him forbids: 
Those pure immortal elements, that know, 
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul, 
Eject him, tainted now; and purge him off, 
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross, 
And mortal food; as may dispose him best 
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first 
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt 
Corrupted.  I, at first, with two fair gifts 
Created him endowed; with happiness, 
And immortality: that fondly lost, 
This other served but to eternize woe; 
Till I provided death: so death becomes 
His final remedy; and, after life, 
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined 
By faith and faithful works, to second life, 
Waked in the renovation of the just, 
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed. 
But let us call to synod all the Blest, 
Through Heaven's wide bounds: from them I will not hide 
My judgements; how with mankind I proceed, 
As how with peccant Angels late they saw, 
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed. 
He ended, and the Son gave signal high 
To the bright minister that watched; he blew 
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps 
When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general doom.  The angelick blast 
Filled all the regions: from their blisful bowers 
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring, 
By the waters of life, where'er they sat 
In fellowships of joy, the sons of light 
Hasted, resorting to the summons high; 
And took their seats; till from his throne supreme 
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will. 
O Sons, like one of us Man is become 
To know both good and evil, since his taste 
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast 
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got; 
Happier! had it sufficed him to have known 
Good by itself, and evil not at all. 
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite, 
My motions in him; longer than they move, 
His heart I know, how variable and vain, 
Self-left.  Lest therefore his now bolder hand 
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat, 
And live for ever, dream at least to live 
For ever, to remove him I decree, 
And send him from the garden forth to till 
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil. 
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge; 
Take to thee from among the Cherubim 
Thy choice of flaming warriours, lest the Fiend, 
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade 
Vacant possession, some new trouble raise: 
Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God 
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair; 
From hallowed ground the unholy; and denounce 
To them, and to their progeny, from thence 
Perpetual banishment.  Yet, lest they faint 
At the sad sentence rigorously urged, 
(For I behold them softened, and with tears 
Bewailing their excess,) all terrour hide. 
If patiently thy bidding they obey, 
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal 
To Adam what shall come in future days, 
As I shall thee enlighten; intermix 
My covenant in the Woman's seed renewed; 
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace: 
And on the east side of the garden place, 
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs, 
Cherubick watch; and of a sword the flame 
Wide-waving; all approach far off to fright, 
And guard all passage to the tree of life: 
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove 
To Spirits foul, and all my trees their prey; 
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude. 
He ceased; and the arch-angelick Power prepared 
For swift descent; with him the cohort bright 
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each 
Had, like a double Janus; all their shape 
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those 
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse, 
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed 
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod.  Mean while, 
To re-salute the world with sacred light, 
Leucothea waked; and with fresh dews imbalmed 
The earth; when Adam and first matron Eve 
Had ended now their orisons, and found 
Strength added from above; new hope to spring 
Out of despair; joy, but with fear yet linked; 
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed. 
Eve, easily my faith admit, that all 
The good which we enjoy from Heaven descends; 
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven 
So prevalent as to concern the mind 
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will, 
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will prayer 
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne 
Even to the seat of God.  For since I sought 
By prayer the offended Deity to appease; 
Kneeled, and before him humbled all my heart; 
Methought I saw him placable and mild, 
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew 
That I was heard with favour; peace returned 
Home to my breast, and to my memory 
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe; 
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now 
Assures me that the bitterness of death 
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence hail to thee, 
Eve rightly called, mother of all mankind, 
Mother of all things living, since by thee 
Man is to live; and all things live for Man. 
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek. 
Ill-worthy I such title should belong 
To me transgressour; who, for thee ordained 
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach 
Rather belongs, distrust, and all dispraise: 
But infinite in pardon was my Judge, 
That I, who first brought death on all, am graced 
The source of life; next favourable thou, 
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsaf'st, 
Far other name deserving.  But the field 
To labour calls us, now with sweat imposed, 
Though after sleepless night; for see!the morn, 
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins 
Her rosy progress smiling: let us forth; 
I never from thy side henceforth to stray, 
Where'er our day's work lies, though now enjoined 
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell, 
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks? 
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content. 
So spake, so wished much humbled Eve; but Fate 
Subscribed not:  Nature first gave signs, impressed 
On bird, beast, air; air suddenly eclipsed, 
After short blush of morn; nigh in her sight 
The bird of Jove, stooped from his aery tour, 
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove; 
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods, 
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace, 
Goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind; 
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight. 
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase 
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake. 
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh, 
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows 
Forerunners of his purpose; or to warn 
Us, haply too secure, of our discharge 
From penalty, because from death released 
Some days: how long, and what till then our life, 
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust, 
And thither must return, and be no more? 
Why else this double object in our sight 
Of flight pursued in the air, and o'er the ground, 
One way the self-same hour? why in the east 
Darkness ere day's mid-course, and morning-light 
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws 
O'er the blue firmament a radiant white, 
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught? 
He erred not; for by this the heavenly bands 
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now 
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt; 
A glorious apparition, had not doubt 
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adam's eye. 
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met 
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw 
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright; 
Nor that, which on the flaming mount appeared 
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire, 
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise 
One man, assassin-like, had levied war, 
War unproclaimed.  The princely Hierarch 
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise 
Possession of the garden; he alone, 
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way, 
Not unperceived of Adam; who to Eve, 
While the great visitant approached, thus spake. 
Eve$ now expect great tidings, which perhaps 
Of us will soon determine, or impose 
New laws to be observed; for I descry, 
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill, 
One of the heavenly host; and, by his gait, 
None of the meanest; some great Potentate 
Or of the Thrones above; such majesty 
Invests him coming! yet not terrible, 
That I should fear; nor sociably mild, 
As Raphael, that I should much confide; 
But solemn and sublime; whom not to offend, 
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire. 
He ended: and the Arch-Angel soon drew nigh, 
Not in his shape celestial, but as man 
Clad to meet man; over his lucid arms 
A military vest of purple flowed, 
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain 
Of Sarra, worn by kings and heroes old 
In time of truce; Iris had dipt the woof; 
His starry helm unbuckled showed him prime 
In manhood where youth ended; by his side, 
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword, 
Satan's dire dread; and in his hand the spear. 
Adam bowed low; he, kingly, from his state 
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared. 
Adam, Heaven's high behest no preface needs: 
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard; and Death, 
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress, 
Defeated of his seisure many days 
Given thee of grace; wherein thou mayest repent, 
And one bad act with many deeds well done 
Mayest cover:  Well may then thy Lord, appeased, 
Redeem thee quite from Death's rapacious claim; 
But longer in this Paradise to dwell 
Permits not: to remove thee I am come, 
And send thee from the garden forth to till 
The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter soil. 
He added not; for Adam at the news 
Heart-struck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood, 
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen 
Yet all had heard, with audible lament 
Discovered soon the place of her retire. 
O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death! 
Must I thus leave thee$ Paradise? thus leave 
Thee, native soil! these happy walks and shades, 
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend, 
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day 
That must be mortal to us both.  O flowers, 
That never will in other climate grow, 
My early visitation, and my last 
 ;t even, which I bred up with tender hand 
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names! 
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank 
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount? 
Thee lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned 
With what to sight or smell was sweet! from thee 
How shall I part, and whither wander down 
Into a lower world; to this obscure 
And wild? how shall we breathe in other air 
Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits? 
Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild. 
Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign 
What justly thou hast lost, nor set thy heart, 
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine: 
Thy going is not lonely; with thee goes 
Thy husband; whom to follow thou art bound; 
Where he abides, think there thy native soil. 
Adam, by this from the cold sudden damp 
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned, 
To Michael thus his humble words addressed. 
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named 
Of them the highest; for such of shape may seem 
Prince above princes! gently hast thou told 
Thy message, which might else in telling wound, 
And in performing end us; what besides 
Of sorrow, and dejection, and despair, 
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring, 
Departure from this happy place, our sweet 
Recess, and only consolation left 
Familiar to our eyes! all places else 
Inhospitable appear, and desolate; 
Nor knowing us, nor known:  And, if by prayer 
Incessant I could hope to change the will 
Of Him who all things can, I would not cease 
To weary him with my assiduous cries: 
But prayer against his absolute decree 
No more avails than breath against the wind, 
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth: 
Therefore to his great bidding I submit. 
This most afflicts me, that, departing hence, 
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived 
His blessed countenance:  Here I could frequent 
With worship place by place where he vouchsafed 
Presence Divine; and to my sons relate, 
'On this mount he appeared; under this tree 
'Stood visible; among these pines his voice 
'I heard; here with him at this fountain talked: 
So many grateful altars I would rear 
Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone 
Of lustre from the brook, in memory, 
Or monument to ages; and theron 
Offer sweet-smelling gums, and fruits, and flowers: 
In yonder nether world where shall I seek 
His bright appearances, or foot-step trace? 
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled 
To life prolonged and promised race, I now 
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts 
Of glory; and far off his steps adore. 
To whom thus Michael with regard benign. 
Adam, thou knowest Heaven his, and all the Earth; 
Not this rock only; his Omnipresence fills 
Land, sea, and air, and every kind that lives, 
Fomented by his virtual power and warmed: 
All the earth he gave thee to possess and rule, 
No despicable gift; surmise not then 
His presence to these narrow bounds confined 
Of Paradise, or Eden: this had been 
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spread 
All generations; and had hither come 
From all the ends of the earth, to celebrate 
And reverence thee, their great progenitor. 
But this pre-eminence thou hast lost, brought down 
To dwell on even ground now with thy sons: 
Yet doubt not but in valley, and in plain, 
God is, as here; and will be found alike 
Present; and of his presence many a sign 
Still following thee, still compassing thee round 
With goodness and paternal love, his face 
Express, and of his steps the track divine. 
Which that thou mayest believe, and be confirmed 
Ere thou from hence depart; know, I am sent 
To show thee what shall come in future days 
To thee, and to thy offspring: good with bad 
Expect to hear; supernal grace contending 
With sinfulness of men; thereby to learn 
True patience, and to temper joy with fear 
And pious sorrow; equally inured 
By moderation either state to bear, 
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead 
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure 
Thy mortal passage when it comes.--Ascend 
This hill; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes) 
Here sleep below; while thou to foresight wakest; 
As once thou sleptst, while she to life was formed. 
To whom thus Adam gratefully replied. 
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path 
Thou leadest me; and to the hand of Heaven submit, 
However chastening; to the evil turn 
My obvious breast; arming to overcome 
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won, 
If so I may attain. -- So both ascend 
In the visions of God.  It was a hill, 
Of Paradise the highest; from whose top 
The hemisphere of earth, in clearest ken, 
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay. 
Not higher that hill, nor wider looking round, 
Whereon, for different cause, the Tempter set 
Our second Adam, in the wilderness; 
To show him all Earth's kingdoms, and their glory. 
His eye might there command wherever stood 
City of old or modern fame, the seat 
Of mightiest empire, from the destined walls 
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can, 
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temir's throne, 
To Paquin of Sinaean kings; and thence 
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul, 
Down to the golden Chersonese; or where 
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since 
In Hispahan; or where the Russian Ksar 
In Mosco; or the Sultan in Bizance, 
Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken 
The empire of Negus to his utmost port 
Ercoco, and the less maritim kings 
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind, 
And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm 
Of Congo, and Angola farthest south; 
Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount 
The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus, 
Morocco, and Algiers, and Tremisen; 
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway 
The world: in spirit perhaps he also saw 
Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume, 
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat 
Of Atabalipa; and yet unspoiled 
Guiana, whose great city Geryon's sons 
Call El Dorado.  But to nobler sights 
Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed, 
Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight 
Had bred; then purged with euphrasy and rue 
The visual nerve, for he had much to see; 
And from the well of life three drops instilled. 
So deep the power of these ingredients pierced, 
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight, 
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes, 
Sunk down, and all his spirits became entranced; 
But him the gentle Angel by the hand 
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled. 
Adam, now ope thine eyes; and first behold 
The effects, which thy original crime hath wrought 
In some to spring from thee; who never touched 
The excepted tree; nor with the snake conspired; 
Nor sinned thy sin; yet from that sin derive 
Corruption, to bring forth more violent deeds. 
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field, 
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves 
New reaped; the other part sheep-walks and folds; 
I' the midst an altar as the land-mark stood, 
Rustick, of grassy sord; thither anon 
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought 
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf, 
Unculled, as came to hand; a shepherd next, 
More meek, came with the firstlings of his flock, 
Choicest and best; then, sacrificing, laid 
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed, 
On the cleft wood, and all due rights performed: 
His offering soon propitious fire from Heaven 
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam; 
The other's not, for his was not sincere; 
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked, 
Smote him into the midriff with a stone 
That beat out life; he fell;and, deadly pale, 
Groaned out his soul with gushing blood effused. 
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart 
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried. 
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen 
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed; 
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid? 
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied. 
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come 
Out of thy loins; the unjust the just hath slain, 
For envy that his brother's offering found 
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody fact 
Will be avenged; and the other's faith, approved, 
Lose no reward; though here thou see him die, 
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which our sire. 
Alas! both for the deed, and for the cause! 
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way 
I must return to native dust?  O sight 
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold, 
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel! 
To whom thus Michael.  Death thou hast seen 
In his first shape on Man; but many shapes 
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead 
To his grim cave, all dismal; yet to sense 
More terrible at the entrance, than within. 
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shall die; 
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more 
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shall bring 
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew 
Before thee shall appear; that thou mayest know 
What misery the inabstinence of Eve 
Shall bring on Men.  Immediately a place 
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark; 
A lazar-house it seemed; wherein were laid 
Numbers of all diseased; all maladies 
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms 
Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds, 
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs, 
Intestine stone and ulcer, colick-pangs, 
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy, 
And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy, 
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence, 
Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums. 
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans; Despair 
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch; 
And over them triumphant Death his dart 
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked 
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope. 
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long 
Dry-eyed behold?  Adam could not, but wept, 
Though not of woman born; compassion quelled 
His best of man, and gave him up to tears 
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess; 
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed. 
O miserable mankind, to what fall 
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved! 
Better end here unborn.  Why is life given 
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why 
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew 
What we receive, would either no accept 
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down; 
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus 
The image of God in Man, created once 
So goodly and erect, though faulty since, 
To such unsightly sufferings be debased 
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man, 
Retaining still divine similitude 
In part, from such deformities be free, 
And, for his Maker's image sake, exempt? 
Their Maker's image, answered Michael, then 
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified 
To serve ungoverned Appetite; and took 
His image whom they served, a brutish vice, 
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve. 
Therefore so abject is their punishment, 
Disfiguring not God's likeness, but their own; 
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced; 
While they pervert pure Nature's healthful rules 
To loathsome sickness; worthily, since they 
God's image did not reverence in themselves. 
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit. 
But is there yet no other way, besides 
These painful passages, how we may come 
To death, and mix with our connatural dust? 
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe 
The rule of Not too much; by temperance taught, 
In what thou eatest and drinkest; seeking from thence 
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight, 
Till many years over thy head return: 
So mayest thou live; till, like ripe fruit, thou drop 
Into thy mother's lap; or be with ease 
Gathered, nor harshly plucked; for death mature: 
This is Old Age; but then, thou must outlive 
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty; which will change 
To withered, weak, and gray; thy senses then, 
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego, 
To what thou hast; and, for the air of youth, 
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign 
A melancholy damp of cold and dry 
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume 
The balm of life.  To whom our ancestor. 
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong 
Life much; bent rather, how I may be quit, 
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge; 
Which I must keep till my appointed day 
Of rendering up, and patiently attend 
My dissolution.  Michael replied. 
Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou livest 
Live well; how long, or short, permit to Heaven: 
And now prepare thee for another sight. 
He looked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon 
Were tents of various hue; by some, were herds 
Of cattle grazing; others, whence the sound 
Of instruments, that made melodious chime, 
Was heard, of harp and organ; and, who moved 
Their stops and chords, was seen; his volant touch, 
Instinct through all proportions, low and high, 
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue. 
In other part stood one who, at the forge 
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass 
Had melted, (whether found where casual fire 
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale, 
Down to the veins of earth; thence gliding hot 
To some cave's mouth; or whether washed by stream 
From underground;) the liquid ore he drained 
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed 
First his own tools; then, what might else be wrought 
Fusil or graven in metal.  After these, 
But on the hither side, a different sort 
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat, 
Down to the plain descended; by their guise 
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent 
To worship God aright, and know his works 
Not hid; nor those things last, which might preserve 
Freedom and peace to Men; they on the plain 
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold! 
A bevy of fair women, richly gay 
In gems and wanton dress; to the harp they sung 
Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on: 
The men, though grave, eyed them; and let their eyes 
Rove without rein; till, in the amorous net 
Fast caught, they liked; and each his liking chose; 
And now of love they treat, till the evening-star, 
Love's harbinger, appeared; then, all in heat 
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke 
Hymen, then first to marriage rites invoked: 
With feast and musick all the tents resound. 
Such happy interview, and fair event 
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers, 
And charming symphonies, attached the heart 
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight, 
The bent of nature; which he thus expressed. 
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest; 
Much better seems this vision, and more hope 
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past; 
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse; 
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends. 
To whom thus Michael.  Judge not what is best 
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet; 
Created, as thou art, to nobler end 
Holy and pure, conformity divine. 
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents 
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race 
Who slew his brother; studious they appear 
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare; 
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit 
Taught them; but they his gifts acknowledged none. 
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget; 
For that fair female troop thou sawest, that seemed 
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay, 
Yet empty of all good wherein consists 
Woman's domestick honour and chief praise; 
Bred only and completed to the taste 
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance, 
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye: 
To these that sober race of men, whose lives 
Religious titled them the sons of God, 
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame 
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles 
Of these fair atheists; and now swim in joy, 
Erelong to swim at large; and laugh, for which 
The world erelong a world of tears must weep. 
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft. 
O pity and shame, that they, who to live well 
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread 
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint! 
But still I see the tenour of Man's woe 
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin. 
From Man's effeminate slackness it begins, 
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place 
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received. 
But now prepare thee for another scene. 
He looked, and saw wide territory spread 
Before him, towns, and rural works between; 
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers, 
Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war, 
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise; 
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming steed, 
Single or in array of battle ranged 
Both horse and foot, nor idly mustering stood; 
One way a band select from forage drives 
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine, 
From a fat meadow ground; or fleecy flock, 
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain, 
Their booty; scarce with life the shepherds fly, 
But call in aid, which makes a bloody fray; 
With cruel tournament the squadrons join; 
Where cattle pastured late, now scattered lies 
With carcasses and arms the ensanguined field, 
Deserted:  Others to a city strong 
Lay siege, encamped; by battery, scale, and mine, 
Assaulting; others from the wall defend 
With dart and javelin, stones, and sulphurous fire; 
On each hand slaughter, and gigantick deeds. 
In other part the sceptered heralds call 
To council, in the city-gates; anon 
Gray-headed men and grave, with warriours mixed, 
Assemble, and harangues are heard; but soon, 
In factious opposition; till at last, 
Of middle age one rising, eminent 
In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong, 
Of justice, or religion, truth, and peace, 
And judgement from above: him old and young 
Exploded, and had seized with violent hands, 
Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence 
Unseen amid the throng: so violence 
Proceeded, and oppression, and sword-law, 
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found. 
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide 
Lamenting turned full sad; O!what are these, 
Death's ministers, not men? who thus deal death 
Inhumanly to men, and multiply 
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew 
His brother: for of whom such massacre 
Make they, but of their brethren; men of men 
But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven 
Rescued, had in his righteousness been lost? 
To whom thus Michael.  These are the product 
Of those ill-mated marriages thou sawest; 
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves 
Abhor to join; and, by imprudence mixed, 
Produce prodigious births of body or mind. 
Such were these giants, men of high renown; 
For in those days might only shall be admired, 
And valour and heroick virtue called; 
To overcome in battle, and subdue 
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite 
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch 
Of human glory; and for glory done 
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerours 
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods; 
Destroyers rightlier called, and plagues of men. 
Thus fame shall be achieved, renown on earth; 
And what most merits fame, in silence hid. 
But he, the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst 
The only righteous in a world preverse, 
And therefore hated, therefore so beset 
With foes, for daring single to be just, 
And utter odious truth, that God would come 
To judge them with his Saints; him the Most High 
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds 
Did, as thou sawest, receive, to walk with God 
High in salvation and the climes of bliss, 
Exempt from death; to show thee what reward 
Awaits the good; the rest what punishment; 
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold. 
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed; 
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar; 
All now was turned to jollity and game, 
To luxury and riot, feast and dance; 
Marrying or prostituting, as befel, 
Rape or adultery, where passing fair 
Allured them; thence from cups to civil broils. 
At length a reverend sire among them came, 
And of their doings great dislike declared, 
And testified against their ways; he oft 
Frequented their assemblies, whereso met, 
Triumphs or festivals; and to them preached 
Conversion and repentance, as to souls 
In prison, under judgements imminent: 
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased 
Contending, and removed his tents far off; 
Then, from the mountain hewing timber tall, 
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk; 
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth; 
Smeared round with pitch; and in the side a door 
Contrived; and of provisions laid in large, 
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange! 
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small, 
Came sevens, and pairs; and entered in as taught 
Their order: last the sire and his three sons, 
With their four wives; and God made fast the door. 
Mean while the south-wind rose, and, with black wings 
Wide-hovering, all the clouds together drove 
From under Heaven; the hills to their supply 
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist, 
Sent up amain; and now the thickened sky 
Like a dark cieling stood; down rushed the rain 
Impetuous; and continued, till the earth 
No more was seen: the floating vessel swum 
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow 
Rode tilting o'er the waves; all dwellings else 
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp 
Deep under water rolled; sea covered sea, 
Sea without shore; and in their palaces, 
Where luxury late reigned, sea-monsters whelped 
And stabled; of mankind, so numerous late, 
All left, in one small bottom swum imbarked. 
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold 
The end of all thy offspring, end so sad, 
Depopulation!  Thee another flood, 
Of tears and sorrow a flood, thee also drowned, 
And sunk thee as thy sons; till, gently reared 
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodest at last, 
Though comfortless; as when a father mourns 
His children, all in view destroyed at once; 
And scarce to the Angel utter'dst thus thy plaint. 
O visions ill foreseen!  Better had I 
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne 
My part of evil only, each day's lot 
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed 
The burden of many ages, on me light 
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth 
Abortive, to torment me ere their being, 
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek 
Henceforth to be foretold, what shall befall 
Him or his children; evil he may be sure, 
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent; 
And he the future evil shall no less 
In apprehension than in substance feel, 
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past, 
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped 
Famine and anguish will at last consume, 
Wandering that watery desart:  I had hope, 
When violence was ceased, and war on earth, 
All would have then gone well; peace would have crowned 
With length of happy days the race of Man; 
But I was far deceived; for now I see 
Peace to corrupt no less than war to waste. 
How comes it thus? unfold, celestial Guide, 
And whether here the race of Man will end. 
To whom thus Michael.  Those, whom last thou sawest 
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they 
First seen in acts of prowess eminent 
And great exploits, but of true virtue void; 
Who, having spilt much blood, and done much wast 
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby 
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey; 
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth, 
Surfeit, and lust; till wantonness and pride 
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace. 
The conquered also, and enslaved by war, 
Shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose 
And fear of God; from whom their piety feigned 
In sharp contest of battle found no aid 
Against invaders; therefore, cooled in zeal, 
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure, 
Worldly or dissolute, on what their lords 
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the earth shall bear 
More than enough, that temperance may be tried: 
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved; 
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot; 
One man except, the only son of light 
In a dark age, against example good, 
Against allurement, custom, and a world 
Offended: fearless of reproach and scorn, 
The grand-child, with twelve sons encreased, departs 
From Canaan, to a land hereafter called 
Egypt, divided by the river Nile; 
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths 
Into the sea:  To sojourn in that land 
He comes, invited by a younger son 
In time of dearth; a son, whose worthy deeds 
Raise him to be the second in that realm 
Of Pharaoh:  There he dies, and leaves his race 
Growing into a nation, and now grown 
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks 
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests 
Or violence, he of their wicked ways 
Shall them admonish; and before them set 
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe 
And full of peace; denouncing wrath to come 
On their impenitence; and shall return 
Of them derided, but of God observed 
The one just man alive; by his command 
Shall build a wonderous ark, as thou beheldst, 
To save himself, and houshold, from amidst 
A world devote to universal wrack. 
No sooner he, with them of man and beast 
Select for life, shall in the ark be lodged, 
And sheltered round; but all the cataracts 
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall pour 
Rain, day and night; all fountains of the deep, 
Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp 
Beyond all bounds; till inundation rise 
Above the highest hills:  Then shall this mount 
Of Paradise by might of waves be moved 
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood, 
With all his verdure spoiled, and trees adrift, 
Down the great river to the opening gulf, 
And there take root an island salt and bare, 
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and sea-mews' clang: 
To teach thee that God attributes to place 
No sanctity, if none be thither brought 
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell. 
And now, what further shall ensue, behold. 
He looked, and saw the ark hull on the flood, 
Which now abated; for the clouds were fled, 
Driven by a keen north-wind, that, blowing dry, 
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed; 
And the clear sun on his wide watery glass 
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew, 
As after thirst; which made their flowing shrink 
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole 
With soft foot towards the deep; who now had stopt 
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut. 
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground, 
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed. 
And now the tops of hills, as rocks, appear; 
With clamour thence the rapid currents drive, 
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide. 
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies, 
And after him, the surer messenger, 
A dove sent forth once and again to spy 
Green tree or ground, whereon his foot may light: 
The second time returning, in his bill 
An olive-leaf he brings, pacifick sign: 
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark 
The ancient sire descends, with all his train; 
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout, 
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds 
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow 
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay, 
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new. 
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad, 
Greatly rejoiced; and thus his joy broke forth. 
O thou, who future things canst represent 
As present, heavenly Instructer!  I revive 
At this last sight; assured that Man shall live, 
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve. 
Far less I now lament for one whole world 
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice 
For one man found so perfect, and so just, 
That God vouchsafes to raise another world 
From him, and all his anger to forget. 
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven 
Distended, as the brow of God appeased? 
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind 
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud, 
Lest it again dissolve, and shower the earth? 
To whom the Arch-Angel.  Dextrously thou aimest; 
So willingly doth God remit his ire, 
Though late repenting him of Man depraved; 
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw 
The whole earth filled with violence, and all flesh 
Corrupting each their way; yet, those removed, 
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight, 
That he relents, not to blot out mankind; 
And makes a covenant never to destroy 
The earth again by flood; nor let the sea 
Surpass his bounds; nor rain to drown the world, 
With man therein or beast; but, when he brings 
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set 
His triple-coloured bow, whereon to look, 
And call to mind his covenant: Day and night, 
Seed-time and harvest, heat and hoary frost, 
Shall hold their course; till fire purge all things new, 
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell. 
 
 
 
Book XII                                                         
 
 
As one who in his journey bates at noon, 
Though bent on speed; so here the Arch-Angel paused 
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored, 
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose; 
Then, with transition sweet, new speech resumes. 
Thus thou hast seen one world begin, and end; 
And Man, as from a second stock, proceed. 
Much thou hast yet to see; but I perceive 
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine 
Must needs impair and weary human sense: 
Henceforth what is to come I will relate; 
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend. 
This second source of Men, while yet but few, 
And while the dread of judgement past remains 
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity, 
With some regard to what is just and right 
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace; 
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop, 
Corn, wine, and oil; and, from the herd or flock, 
Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid, 
With large wine-offerings poured, and sacred feast, 
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed; and dwell 
Long time in peace, by families and tribes, 
Under paternal rule: till one shall rise 
Of proud ambitious heart; who, not content 
With fair equality, fraternal state, 
Will arrogate dominion undeserved 
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess 
Concord and law of nature from the earth; 
Hunting (and men not beasts shall be his game) 
With war, and hostile snare, such as refuse 
Subjection to his empire tyrannous: 
A mighty hunter thence he shall be styled 
Before the Lord; as in despite of Heaven, 
Or from Heaven, claiming second sovranty; 
And from rebellion shall derive his name, 
Though of rebellion others he accuse. 
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins 
With him or under him to tyrannize, 
Marching from Eden towards the west, shall find 
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge 
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell: 
Of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build 
A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven; 
And get themselves a name; lest, far dispersed 
In foreign lands, their memory be lost; 
Regardless whether good or evil fame. 
But God, who oft descends to visit men 
Unseen, and through their habitations walks 
To mark their doings, them beholding soon, 
Comes down to see their city, ere the tower 
Obstruct Heaven-towers, and in derision sets 
Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase 
Quite out their native language; and, instead, 
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown: 
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud, 
Among the builders; each to other calls 
Not understood; till hoarse, and all in rage, 
As mocked they storm: great laughter was in Heaven, 
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange, 
And hear the din:  Thus was the building left 
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named. 
Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased. 
O execrable son! so to aspire 
Above his brethren; to himself assuming 
Authority usurped, from God not given: 
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl, 
Dominion absolute; that right we hold 
By his donation; but man over men 
He made not lord; such title to himself 
Reserving, human left from human free. 
But this usurper his encroachment proud 
Stays not on Man; to God his tower intends 
Siege and defiance:  Wretched man!what food 
Will he convey up thither, to sustain 
Himself and his rash army; where thin air 
Above the clouds will pine his entrails gross, 
And famish him of breath, if not of bread? 
To whom thus Michael.  Justly thou abhorrest 
That son, who on the quiet state of men 
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue 
Rational liberty; yet know withal, 
Since thy original lapse, true liberty 
Is lost, which always with right reason dwells 
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being: 
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed, 
Immediately inordinate desires, 
And upstart passions, catch the government 
From reason; and to servitude reduce 
Man, till then free.  Therefore, since he permits 
Within himself unworthy powers to reign 
Over free reason, God, in judgement just, 
Subjects him from without to violent lords; 
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall 
His outward freedom:  Tyranny must be; 
Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse. 
Yet sometimes nations will decline so low 
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong, 
But justice, and some fatal curse annexed, 
Deprives them of their outward liberty; 
Their inward lost:  Witness the irreverent son 
Of him who built the ark; who, for the shame 
Done to his father, heard this heavy curse, 
Servant of servants, on his vicious race. 
Thus will this latter, as the former world, 
Still tend from bad to worse; till God at last, 
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw 
His presence from among them, and avert 
His holy eyes; resolving from thenceforth 
To leave them to their own polluted ways; 
And one peculiar nation to select 
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked, 
A nation from one faithful man to spring: 
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing, 
Bred up in idol-worship:  O, that men 
(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown, 
While yet the patriarch lived, who 'scaped the flood, 
As to forsake the living God, and fall 
To worship their own work in wood and stone 
For Gods!  Yet him God the Most High vouchsafes 
To call by vision, from his father's house, 
His kindred, and false Gods, into a land 
Which he will show him; and from him will raise 
A mighty nation; and upon him shower 
His benediction so, that in his seed 
All nations shall be blest: he straight obeys; 
Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes: 
I see him, but thou canst not, with what faith 
He leaves his Gods, his friends, and native soil, 
Ur of Chaldaea, passing now the ford 
To Haran; after him a cumbrous train 
Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude; 
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth 
With God, who called him, in a land unknown. 
Canaan he now attains; I see his tents 
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain 
Of Moreh; there by promise he receives 
Gift to his progeny of all that land, 
From Hameth northward to the Desart south; 
(Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed;) 
From Hermon east to the great western Sea; 
Mount Hermon, yonder sea; each place behold 
In prospect, as I point them; on the shore 
Mount Carmel; here, the double-founted stream, 
Jordan, true limit eastward; but his sons 
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of hills. 
This ponder, that all nations of the earth 
Shall in his seed be blessed:  By that seed 
Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shall bruise 
The Serpent's head; whereof to thee anon 
Plainlier shall be revealed.  This patriarch blest, 
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call, 
A son, and of his son a grand-child, leaves; 
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown: 
The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs 
From Canaan to a land hereafter called 
Egypt, divided by the river Nile 
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths 
Into the sea. To sojourn in that land 
He comes, invited by a younger son 
In time of dearth, a son whose worthy deeds 
Raise him to be the second in that realm 
Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race 
Growing into a nation, and now grown 
Suspected to a sequent king, who seeks 
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests 
Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves 
Inhospitably, and kills their infant males: 
Till by two brethren (these two brethren call 
Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claim 
His people from enthralment, they return, 
With glory and spoil, back to their promised land. 
But first, the lawless tyrant, who denies 
To know their God, or message to regard, 
Must be compelled by signs and judgements dire; 
To blood unshed the rivers must be turned; 
Frogs, lice, and flies, must all his palace fill 
With loathed intrusion, and fill all the land; 
His cattle must of rot and murren die; 
Botches and blains must all his flesh emboss, 
And all his people; thunder mixed with hail, 
Hail mixed with fire, must rend the Egyptians sky, 
And wheel on the earth, devouring where it rolls; 
What it devours not, herb, or fruit, or grain, 
A darksome cloud of locusts swarming down 
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green; 
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds, 
Palpable darkness, and blot out three days; 
Last, with one midnight stroke, all the first-born 
Of Egypt must lie dead.  Thus with ten wounds 
The river-dragon tamed at length submits 
To let his sojourners depart, and oft 
Humbles his stubborn heart; but still, as ice 
More hardened after thaw; till, in his rage 
Pursuing whom he late dismissed, the sea 
Swallows him with his host; but them lets pass, 
As on dry land, between two crystal walls; 
Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand 
Divided, till his rescued gain their shore: 
Such wondrous power God to his saint will lend, 
Though present in his Angel; who shall go 
Before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire; 
By day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire; 
To guide them in their journey, and remove 
Behind them, while the obdurate king pursues: 
All night he will pursue; but his approach 
Darkness defends between till morning watch; 
Then through the fiery pillar, and the cloud, 
God looking forth will trouble all his host, 
And craze their chariot-wheels: when by command 
Moses once more his potent rod extends 
Over the sea; the sea his rod obeys; 
On their embattled ranks the waves return, 
And overwhelm their war:  The race elect 
Safe toward Canaan from the shore advance 
Through the wild Desart, not the readiest way; 
Lest, entering on the Canaanite alarmed, 
War terrify them inexpert, and fear 
Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather 
Inglorious life with servitude; for life 
To noble and ignoble is more sweet 
Untrained in arms, where rashness leads not on. 
This also shall they gain by their delay 
In the wide wilderness; there they shall found 
Their government, and their great senate choose 
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordained: 
God from the mount of Sinai, whose gray top 
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself 
In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpets' sound, 
Ordain them laws; part, such as appertain 
To civil justice; part, religious rites 
Of sacrifice; informing them, by types 
And shadows, of that destined Seed to bruise 
The Serpent, by what means he shall achieve 
Mankind's deliverance.  But the voice of God 
To mortal ear is dreadful:  They beseech 
That Moses might report to them his will, 
And terrour cease; he grants what they besought, 
Instructed that to God is no access 
Without Mediator, whose high office now 
Moses in figure bears; to introduce 
One greater, of whose day he shall foretel, 
And all the Prophets in their age the times 
Of great Messiah shall sing.  Thus, laws and rites 
Established, such delight hath God in Men 
Obedient to his will, that he vouchsafes 
Among them to set up his tabernacle; 
The Holy One with mortal Men to dwell: 
By his prescript a sanctuary is framed 
Of cedar, overlaid with gold; therein 
An ark, and in the ark his testimony, 
The records of his covenant; over these 
A mercy-seat of gold, between the wings 
Of two bright Cherubim; before him burn 
Seven lamps as in a zodiack representing 
The heavenly fires; over the tent a cloud 
Shall rest by day, a fiery gleam by night; 
Save when they journey, and at length they come, 
Conducted by his Angel, to the land 
Promised to Abraham and his seed:--The rest 
Were long to tell; how many battles fought 
How many kings destroyed; and kingdoms won; 
Or how the sun shall in mid Heaven stand still 
A day entire, and night's due course adjourn, 
Man's voice commanding, 'Sun, in Gibeon stand, 
'And thou moon in the vale of Aialon, 
'Till Israel overcome! so call the third 
From Abraham, son of Isaac; and from him 
His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win. 
Here Adam interposed.  O sent from Heaven, 
Enlightener of my darkness, gracious things 
Thou hast revealed; those chiefly, which concern 
Just Abraham and his seed: now first I find 
Mine eyes true-opening, and my heart much eased; 
Erewhile perplexed with thoughts, what would become 
Of me and all mankind:  But now I see 
His day, in whom all nations shall be blest; 
Favour unmerited by me, who sought 
Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means. 
This yet I apprehend not, why to those 
Among whom God will deign to dwell on earth 
So many and so various laws are given; 
So many laws argue so many sins 
Among them; how can God with such reside? 
To whom thus Michael.  Doubt not but that sin 
Will reign among them, as of thee begot; 
And therefore was law given them, to evince 
Their natural pravity, by stirring up 
Sin against law to fight: that when they see 
Law can discover sin, but not remove, 
Save by those shadowy expiations weak, 
The blood of bulls and goats, they may conclude 
Some blood more precious must be paid for Man; 
Just for unjust; that, in such righteousness 
To them by faith imputed, they may find 
Justification towards God, and peace 
Of conscience; which the law by ceremonies 
Cannot appease; nor Man the mortal part 
Perform; and, not performing, cannot live. 
So law appears imperfect; and but given 
With purpose to resign them, in full time, 
Up to a better covenant; disciplined 
From shadowy types to truth; from flesh to spirit; 
From imposition of strict laws to free 
Acceptance of large grace; from servile fear 
To filial; works of law to works of faith. 
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God 
Highly beloved, being but the minister 
Of law, his people into Canaan lead; 
But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call, 
His name and office bearing, who shall quell 
The adversary-Serpent, and bring back 
Through the world's wilderness long-wandered Man 
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest. 
Mean while they, in their earthly Canaan placed, 
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins 
National interrupt their publick peace, 
Provoking God to raise them enemies; 
From whom as oft he saves them penitent 
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom 
The second, both for piety renowned 
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive 
Irrevocable, that his regal throne 
For ever shall endure; the like shall sing 
All Prophecy, that of the royal stock 
Of David (so I name this king) shall rise 
A Son, the Woman's seed to thee foretold, 
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust 
All nations; and to kings foretold, of kings 
The last; for of his reign shall be no end. 
But first, a long succession must ensue; 
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed, 
The clouded ark of God, till then in tents 
Wandering, shall in a glorious temple enshrine. 
Such follow him, as shall be registered 
Part good, part bad; of bad the longer scroll; 
Whose foul idolatries, and other faults 
Heaped to the popular sum, will so incense 
God, as to leave them, and expose their land, 
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark, 
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey 
To that proud city, whose high walls thou sawest 
Left in confusion; Babylon thence called. 
There in captivity he lets them dwell 
The space of seventy years; then brings them back, 
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn 
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven. 
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings 
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God 
They first re-edify; and for a while 
In mean estate live moderate; till, grown 
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow; 
But first among the priests dissention springs, 
Men who attend the altar, and should most 
Endeavour peace: their strife pollution brings 
Upon the temple itself: at last they seise 
The scepter, and regard not David's sons; 
Then lose it to a stranger, that the true 
Anointed King Messiah might be born 
Barred of his right; yet at his birth a star, 
Unseen before in Heaven, proclaims him come; 
And guides the eastern sages, who inquire 
His place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold: 
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells 
To simple shepherds, keeping watch by night; 
They gladly thither haste, and by a quire 
Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung. 
A virgin is his mother, but his sire 
The power of the Most High:  He shall ascend 
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign 
With Earth's wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens. 
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy 
Surcharged, as had like grief been dewed in tears, 
Without the vent of words; which these he breathed. 
O prophet of glad tidings, finisher 
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand 
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain; 
Why our great Expectation should be called 
The seed of Woman:  Virgin Mother, hail, 
High in the love of Heaven; yet from my loins 
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy womb the Son 
Of God Most High: so God with Man unites! 
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise 
Expect with mortal pain:  Say where and when 
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the victor's heel. 
To whom thus Michael.  Dream not of their fight, 
As of a duel, or the local wounds 
Of head or heel:  Not therefore joins the Son 
Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil 
Thy enemy; nor so is overcome 
Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise, 
Disabled, not to give thee thy death's wound: 
Which he, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure, 
Not by destroying Satan, but his works 
In thee, and in thy seed:  Nor can this be, 
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want, 
Obedience to the law of God, imposed 
On penalty of death, and suffering death; 
The penalty to thy transgression due, 
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow: 
So only can high Justice rest appaid. 
The law of God exact he shall fulfil 
Both by obedience and by love, though love 
Alone fulfil the law; thy punishment 
He shall endure, by coming in the flesh 
To a reproachful life, and cursed death; 
Proclaiming life to all who shall believe 
In his redemption; and that his obedience, 
Imputed, becomes theirs by faith; his merits 
To save them, not their own, though legal, works. 
For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed, 
Seised on by force, judged, and to death condemned 
A shameful and accursed, nailed to the cross 
By his own nation; slain for bringing life: 
But to the cross he nails thy enemies, 
The law that is against thee, and the sins 
Of all mankind, with him there crucified, 
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust 
In this his satisfaction; so he dies, 
But soon revives; Death over him no power 
Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light 
Return, the stars of morn shall see him rise 
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light, 
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems, 
His death for Man, as many as offered life 
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace 
By faith not void of works:  This God-like act 
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldest have died, 
In sin for ever lost from life; this act 
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength, 
Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms; 
And fix far deeper in his head their stings 
Than temporal death shall bruise the victor's heel, 
Or theirs whom he redeems; a death, like sleep, 
A gentle wafting to immortal life. 
Nor after resurrection shall he stay 
Longer on earth, than certain times to appear 
To his disciples, men who in his life 
Still followed him; to them shall leave in charge 
To teach all nations what of him they learned 
And his salvation; them who shall believe 
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign 
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life 
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall, 
For death, like that which the Redeemer died. 
All nations they shall teach; for, from that day, 
Not only to the sons of Abraham's loins 
Salvation shall be preached, but to the sons 
Of Abraham's faith wherever through the world; 
So in his seed all nations shall be blest. 
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend 
With victory, triumphing through the air 
Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise 
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains 
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave; 
Then enter into glory, and resume 
His seat at God's right hand, exalted high 
Above all names in Heaven; and thence shall come, 
When this world's dissolution shall be ripe, 
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead; 
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward 
His faithful, and receive them into bliss, 
Whether in Heaven or Earth; for then the Earth 
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place 
Than this of Eden, and far happier days. 
So spake the Arch-Angel Michael; then paused, 
As at the world's great period; and our sire, 
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied. 
O Goodness infinite, Goodness immense! 
That all this good of evil shall produce, 
And evil turn to good; more wonderful 
Than that which by creation first brought forth 
Light out of darkness!  Full of doubt I stand, 
Whether I should repent me now of sin 
By me done, and occasioned; or rejoice 
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring; 
To God more glory, more good-will to Men 
From God, and over wrath grace shall abound. 
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven 
Must re-ascend, what will betide the few 
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd, 
The enemies of truth?  Who then shall guide 
His people, who defend?  Will they not deal 
Worse with his followers than with him they dealt? 
Be sure they will, said the Angel; but from Heaven 
He to his own a Comforter will send, 
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell 
His Spirit within them; and the law of faith, 
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write, 
To guide them in all truth; and also arm 
With spiritual armour, able to resist 
Satan's assaults, and quench his fiery darts; 
What man can do against them, not afraid, 
Though to the death; against such cruelties 
With inward consolations recompensed, 
And oft supported so as shall amaze 
Their proudest persecutors:  For the Spirit, 
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends 
To evangelize the nations, then on all 
Baptized, shall them with wonderous gifts endue 
To speak all tongues, and do all miracles, 
As did their Lord before them.  Thus they win 
Great numbers of each nation to receive 
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven:  At length 
Their ministry performed, and race well run, 
Their doctrine and their story written left, 
They die; but in their room, as they forewarn, 
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves, 
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven 
To their own vile advantages shall turn 
Of lucre and ambition; and the truth 
With superstitions and traditions taint, 
Left only in those written records pure, 
Though not but by the Spirit understood. 
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names, 
Places, and titles, and with these to join 
Secular power; though feigning still to act 
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating 
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given 
To all believers; and, from that pretence, 
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force 
On every conscience; laws which none shall find 
Left them inrolled, or what the Spirit within 
Shall on the heart engrave.  What will they then 
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind 
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild 
His living temples, built by faith to stand, 
Their own faith, not another's? for, on earth, 
Who against faith and conscience can be heard 
Infallible? yet many will presume: 
Whence heavy persecution shall arise 
On all, who in the worship persevere 
Of spirit and truth; the rest, far greater part, 
Will deem in outward rites and specious forms 
Religion satisfied; Truth shall retire 
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith 
Rarely be found:  So shall the world go on, 
To good malignant, to bad men benign; 
Under her own weight groaning; till the day 
Appear of respiration to the just, 
And vengeance to the wicked, at return 
Of him so lately promised to thy aid, 
The Woman's Seed; obscurely then foretold, 
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord; 
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed 
In glory of the Father, to dissolve 
Satan with his perverted world; then raise 
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined, 
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endless date, 
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love; 
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal bliss. 
He ended; and thus Adam last replied. 
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest, 
Measured this transient world, the race of time, 
Till time stand fixed!  Beyond is all abyss, 
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach. 
Greatly-instructed I shall hence depart; 
Greatly in peace of thought; and have my fill 
Of knowledge, what this vessel can contain; 
Beyond which was my folly to aspire. 
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best, 
And love with fear the only God; to walk 
As in his presence; ever to observe 
His providence; and on him sole depend, 
Merciful over all his works, with good 
Still overcoming evil, and by small 
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak 
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise 
By simply meek: that suffering for truth's sake 
Is fortitude to highest victory, 
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life; 
Taught this by his example, whom I now 
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest. 
To whom thus also the Angel last replied. 
This having learned, thou hast attained the sum 
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the stars 
Thou knewest by name, and all the ethereal powers, 
All secrets of the deep, all Nature's works, 
Or works of God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea, 
And all the riches of this world enjoyedst, 
And all the rule, one empire; only add 
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith, 
Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love, 
By name to come called charity, the soul 
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth 
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess 
A Paradise within thee, happier far.-- 
Let us descend now therefore from this top 
Of speculation; for the hour precise 
Exacts our parting hence; and see!the guards, 
By me encamped on yonder hill, expect 
Their motion; at whose front a flaming sword, 
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round: 
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve; 
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed 
Portending good, and all her spirits composed 
To meek submission: thou, at season fit, 
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard; 
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know, 
The great deliverance by her seed to come 
(For by the Woman's seed) on all mankind: 
That ye may live, which will be many days, 
Both in one faith unanimous, though sad, 
With cause, for evils past; yet much more cheered 
With meditation on the happy end. 
He ended, and they both descend the hill; 
Descended, Adam to the bower, where Eve 
Lay sleeping, ran before; but found her waked; 
And thus with words not sad she him received. 
Whence thou returnest, and whither wentest, I know; 
For God is also in sleep; and dreams advise, 
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good 
Presaging, since with sorrow and heart's distress 
Wearied I fell asleep:  But now lead on; 
In me is no delay; with thee to go, 
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay, 
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me 
Art all things under $Heaven, all places thou, 
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence. 
This further consolation yet secure 
I carry hence; though all by me is lost, 
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed, 
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore. 
So spake our mother Eve; and Adam heard 
Well pleased, but answered not:  For now, too nigh 
The Arch-Angel stood; and, from the other hill 
To their fixed station, all in bright array 
The Cherubim descended; on the ground 
Gliding meteorous, as evening-mist 
Risen from a river o'er the marish glides, 
And gathers ground fast at the labourer's heel 
Homeward returning.  High in front advanced, 
The brandished sword of God before them blazed, 
Fierce as a comet; which with torrid heat, 
And vapour as the Libyan air adust, 
Began to parch that temperate clime; whereat 
In either hand the hastening Angel caught 
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate 
Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast 
To the subjected plain; then disappeared. 
They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld 
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat, 
Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate 
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms: 
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon; 
The world was all before them, where to choose 
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide: 
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow, 
